Nett' York Times
N E W L Y  R E V IS E D  W IT H  T H E  LA T EST . 
^
! 
S A F E S T  O R G A N IC  C O N T R O L S  
J j
ORGANIC GARDENER'S 
«
HANDBOOK of 
^
 
NATURAL INSECT and 
DISEASE CONTROL
A Complete Problem-Solving Guide to Keeping 
Your Garden and Yard Healthy without Chemicals
Edited by
Barbara W. Ellis
and Fern Marshall Bradley
Copyrighted maternal

THE ORGANIC GARDENER'S
HANDBOOK OF
N A T U R A L
INSECT
A M D
DISEASE
CONTROL
T h i 8 O ne
NWQX -
56-N
Copyrighted material

THE ORGANIC GARDENER'S
HANDBOOK OF
N
A
T
U
R
A
L
A N D
CONTROL
A  Complete Problem-Solving Guide 
to Keeping Your Garden & Yard Healthy 
without Chemicals
EDITED BY
BARBARA W. ELLIS a n d  FERN M AR SH ALL BRADLEY
Contributing Writers: Helen Atthowe, Linda A. Gilkeson, Ph.D., L. Patricia Kite, 
Patricia S. Michalak, Barbara Pleasant, Lee Reich, Ph.D., Alfred F. Scheider
Rodale Press, Emmaus, Pennsylvania

T
he information in this book has been 
carefully researched, and all efforts have 
been made to ensure accuracy. Rodale Press. 
Inc.. assumes no responsibility for any injuries 
suffered or damages or losses incurred during 
use of or as a result of following this informa­
tion. It is important to study all directions 
carefully before taking any action based on 
the information and advice presented in this 
book. When using any commercial product. 
always read and follow label directions. Where 
trade names are used, no discrimination is 
intended and no endorsement by Rodale 
Press. Inc.. is implied.
On the Back Cover (hardcover):
Left: Colorado potato beetle adult, larvae, and eggs. Photo 
by Ron West.
Right; Mealybug destroyer larva. Photo by Max E. Badgley.
Center; Convergent lady beetle attacking aphids. Photo 
by Ron West.
On the Back Cover (paperback):
Top: Colorado potato beetle adult, larvae, and eggs. Photo 
by Ron West.
Center: Mealybug destroyer larva. Photo by Max E. Badgley.
Bottom: Convergent lady beetle attacking aphids. Photo 
by Ron West.
If you have any questions or comments concerning this 
book. please write:
Rodale Press 
Book Readers' Service 
33 East Minor Street 
Emma us, PA 18098
Copyright 0  19% by Rodale Press. Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced 
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any other 
information storage and retrieval system, without the 
written permission of the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America 
on acid-free 
recycled 
paper
Senior Managing Editor: Margaret Lydic Balitas 
Senior Editor: Barbara W. Ellis 
Editor: Fern Marshall Bradley 
Production Editor: Nancy J. Ondra 
Contributing Editors: Nancy J. Ondra. Deborah L. Martin, 
Jean M. A. Nick, Paula Dreifus Bakule 
Photo Editor: Heidi A. Stonehill 
Copy Editor: Lisa D. Andruscavage 
Editorial Production Coordinators: Stacy A. Brobst,
Susan Nickol
Editorial/Administrative Assistant: Karen Earl-Braymcr 
Book Designer Darlene Sehneck
Cover Designer (paperback): Stan Green. Green Graphics 
Front cover photo (hardcover): T. L. Gettings 
Front cover photos (paperback): Dwight R. Kuhn 
illustrations; Julia S. Child. Jean Emmons
The Library of Congress has cataloged the original edition 
as follows:
The Organic gardener's handbook of natural insect and 
disease control: a complete problem-solving guide to 
keeping your garden & yard healthy without chemicals / 
edited by Barbara W. Ellis and Fern Marshall Bradley : 
contributing writers. Helen Atthowe . . .  |et at.|. 
p. 
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-87596- 124-X 
hardcover 
I. Garden pests—Control. 
2. Organic gardening.
3. Plants. Protection of. 
I. Ellis. Barbara W.
IL Bradley. Fern Marshall. 
III. Atthowe, Helen. 
SB974.072 
1992
635’.049—dc20 
92-3372
CIP
ISBN 0-87596-753-1 
paperback
Distributed in the book trade by St. Martin's Press
8 
10 9 
hardcover
10 
paperback
Copyrighted m

CONTENTS
Contributors............... .................................................. 
vii
How to Use This Book ............................................................viii
PART 1 Your Healthy Garden 
x
A Plant-by-Plcmt Guide to Problem Solving and Prevention 
Problem-Solving Plant Guide 
.....................................................  11
PART 2  Insects 
254
Recognizing Your Friends—Eliminating Your Foes
Insect Identification Guide______________________^...■ ■ „_268
PART 3  Diseases_„ ___  
338
Identifying the Causes—Implementing the Cures
Disease Symptom Guide ............................................................  370
PART 4 Organic Controls 
m
Using Remedies Safely 
Cultural Controls
Physical Controls....................................................................... 429
Biological Controls.....................................................................437
Organic Sprays and D usts......................................................... 463
USDA Plant Hardiness Zone M a p ......................................486
Common and Botanical Names of Plants ................. 48?
Sources . ............................... 
............................489
R ecom m ended Reading .................................................... 493
Photography C redits ............................................................496
Index...............................................................................499

CONTRIBUTORS
Writers
Helen Atthowe has a m asters degree in 
horticulture (specializing in pomology) from 
Rutgers University. She has worked as a pri­
vate pest management consultant and has 
worked with the New Jersey Cooperative Exten­
sion Service as an agent specializing in inte­
grated pest management.
Linda A. Gilkeson, Ph.D., is coauthor 
of Rodale's Chemical-Free Yard and Carden 
and is an integrated pest management coor­
dinator in the Ministry of Environment for the 
province of British Columbia. She has a doc­
torate in entomology from McGill University, 
Montreal, and has published several articles 
in scientific journals.
L. Patricia Kite is the author of Con­
trolling Lawn and Garden Insects, The Home 
Gardener 's Problem Solver, and Organic Gar­
dening: Vegetables and coauthor of Califor­
nia Cutting Garden. A resident of Newark, 
California, she holds a master's degree in jour­
nalism and a teaching credential in biology.
Patricia S. Michalak has a masters degree 
in entomology from Michigan State University. 
She applies her ten years of research experi­
ence in agricultural entomology to her efforts 
as a freelance writer. She markets herbs and 
gourmet vegetables organically grown at her 
farm. Long and Winding Row Farm, in Kemp- 
ton, Pennsylvania.
Barbara Pleasant is the author of The 
Handbook of Southern Vegetable Gardening 
and is a contributing editor for Organic Gar­
dening magazine.
Lee Reich, Ph.D., is the author of Un­
common Fruits Worthy of Attention and A 
Northeast Gardener’s Year and a former fruit 
researcher for Cornell University and the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. He currently is a 
horticultural consultant and writer.
Alfred F. Scheider holds a bachelor's 
degree from the New York State College of 
Agriculture at Cornell. He is the author of 
Success with Bulbs and has had articles pub­
lished in the New York Times. House Beauti­
ful. and House and Garden.
Editors
Barbara W. Ellis has a bachelor of arts 
degree from Kenyon College in Ohio and a 
bachelor’s degree in horticulture from The 
Ohio State University. She is a former publica­
tions director/editor for American Horticul­
turist. the publication of the American Horti­
cultural Society, and is the senior editor of 
garden books at Rodale Press.
Fern Marshall Bradley has a bachelors 
degree in plant science from Cornell Univer­
sity and a master’s degree in horticulture from 
Rutgers University. She has managed an organic 
market garden and is a garden book editor at 
Rodale Press.
vii

HOW TO USE 
THIS BOOK
W h e th e r it's spots on the tomatoes, mel­
ons that wilt and die mysteriously, or worm- 
eaten apples, damage from insects and disease 
organisms is never welcome. How to manage 
these problems is a top concern of gardeners 
everywhere. This book is specifically designed 
to help. Its quick-reference format quickly 
leads you to complete control information 
for a wide range of common insect and dis­
ease pests.
How to Find It
One look at the contents will illustrate 
that The Organic Gardener's Handbook o f 
Natural Insect and Disease Control is really 
four books in one. Once you've paged through 
it to familiarize yourself with the format, flip­
ping to the section you need will become sec­
ond nature. And for quick and easy access to 
information, don't forget the index. Here’s a 
rundown of what is included in the pages 
that follow.
Part 1, Your Healthy Garden: A Plant- 
by-Plant Guide to Problem Solving and Pre­
vention. contains a plant encyclopedia with 
symptoms and solutions for major problems 
of popular plants, including fruits, vegetables, 
annuals, bulbs, perennials, and trees and shrubs. 
It also contains preventive information and 
general entries on major plant groups—plus 
stunning illustrations of common problems 
on the most popular garden plants.
Part 2, Insects: Recognizing Your Friends
— Eliminating Your Foes, contains information 
on managing pest insects and attracting bene- 
ficials. It also features a photographic “Insect 
Identification Guide” of more than 1(K) com­
mon pests as well as more than 20 types of 
beneficial insects. (The names of the benefi­
cial insects are set in green type; the names 
of the pest insects are in black.)
Part 3, Diseases: Identifying the Causes
— Implementing the Cures, is a primer on plant 
disease that will help you diagnose and con­
trol problems caused by fungi, bacteria, and 
viruses. In this part, you’ll also find a photo­
graphic “Disease Symptom Guide” to help 
you identify problems in your own garden.
Part 4, Organic Controls: Using Reme­
dies Safely, is an encyclopedia of organically 
acceptable control techniques and products. 
The major types of controls (cultural, physical, 
biological, and organic sprays and dusts) are 
presented in order of least to most invasive to 
make it easy to choose the best control.
Remembering the Big Picture
As you use this book, though, it’s impor­
tant that you not lose sight of the big picture 
of gardening organically. One of the princi­
ples that is at the heart of organic gardening is 
eliminating the need to use sprays and dusts at 
all—even organically acceptable ones. This 
may seem impossible at first, even foolhardy, 
but organic gardeners everywhere will attest 
to the fact that it makes gardening more 
enjoyable—and safer—than ever.
So where do you start? Logically enough, 
at the beginning. The opening pages of part 1 
of this book give you the big picture of organic 
garden management. If you skip right to the 
controls listed in the plant encyclopedia entries 
or to the control sections in parts 2 and 3, 
you’ll be missing loads of valuable informa*
viii

HOW TO I Si: THIS IKK)K 
■ 
ix
tion that can help prevent pests from reaching 
a problematic level in your yard and garden.
Surprisingly, most of the best ways to 
control pests and diseases may not seem like 
controls at all. Organic gardeners look at their 
gardens as an overall system that should be 
kept in balance, so no one pest or disease gets 
out of hand. They concentrate their efforts on 
cultural techniques that prevent problems, such 
as keeping their plants in top-notch health 
and cultivating rich, organically active soil. 
They also try to encourage a diverse commu­
nity of predators to keep pests in check.
While the individual plant, insect, and 
disease entries do list some preventive measures, 
they are primarily designed to help you decide 
what to do once you've encountered specific 
problems in your garden. But keep in mind 
that preventive measures are the keys to suc­
cessful organic gardening. To get the most out 
of this book—and to develop an effective pest- 
and disease-control system for your garden— 
take the time to review the preventive meth­
ods discussed in the introduction to part 1, 
and follow up by studying the descriptions of 
these methods in part 4. Then, make a plan to 
begin implementing them in your garden.
Of course, you'll also find that this book 
is an invaluable reference for finding solu­
tions to garden problems: Throughout these 
pages, you’ll find up-to-date, detailed infor­
mation on how to handle problems. When
you do refer to recommendations for control­
ling a specific insect or disease, always use the 
least-invasive method available. Cultural con­
trols are generally the most benign, followed 
by physical and biological controls. Organic 
sprays and dusts should always be considered 
a last resort.
Since botanical pesticides are organically 
acceptable, we include them in our recom­
mendations throughout this book. So there 
are hundreds of recommendations for apply­
ing botanical chemicals as well as sulfur and 
copper fungicides. This does not mean we are 
endorsing widespread use of botanical pesti­
cides. It will only be in exceptional cases in 
any individual home garden that the chemical 
method will be needed. It’s critical to remem­
ber not to rely on a control approach —you'll 
be most successful, and safest, if you empha­
size practices to promote garden health, and 
use this book for problem solving in those 
few cases when a pest population gets out 
of balance.
If you do decide to use one of the botani­
cal sprays or dusts, always rem em ber that 
they can be dangerous, especially to the per­
son applying them. There is a reason these 
products kill insects! Never use them casually 
or carelessly. And whenever you use commer­
cial products, always read and follow label 
directions.
ial

■4 • $
PART
YOUR HEALTHY 
GARDEN
A Plant-by-Plant Guide to 
Problem Solving and Prevention

controlling pests and diseases organically means 
much more than simply changing the types of sprays 
and dusts you use. Organic gardeners strive to develop a 
balanced system where problems are regulated natu­
rally and where there is little need to use even the safest 
organic sprays and dusts to control pest problems.
- r
mm
■ ■ m z
■
• It. .
v*v
-V-5 
‘ ‘-‘TAT'
' ,< ’’i
r  -li/ T'-X +V A
Ml

T hroughout this book, you’ll find hundreds 
of nonchemical suggestions for stopping insects 
in their tracks or curbing diseases before they 
overtake your yard. There are also recom­
mendations for using organically acceptable 
fungicides and insecticides. These are offered 
as a last resort — for the exceptional cases when 
the natural balance has been disturbed and 
pest problems threaten to ruin the harvest or 
kill your plants.
To understand why maintaining the natu­
ral balance in your garden is important, it 
helps to think atx>ut wild systems like a wood­
land or meadow. Have you ever wondered 
why pests and diseases haven’t overrun the 
plants growing there? The answer is that over 
time, the community has developed a system 
of checks and balances that prevents devasta­
ting outbreaks of pests or diseases. Some insects 
in a woodland or meadow eat plants, but natu­
ral predators and parasites keep their num­
bers in check. The cycle of plant growth and 
decay ensures that soil fertility will be main­
tained to help keep plants healthy and more 
resistant to insect and disease problems. Plants 
that can't adapt to the prevailing climate and 
soil conditions will lose out, and a plant mix 
that can thrive in those conditions will survive. 
This natural system is at work in your own 
garden, and this book is about the many ways 
you can make these natural checks and bal­
ances work for you.
As you peruse the entries in the “Problem- 
Solving Plant Guide’’ beginning on page 11 — 
as well as the sections on insects, diseases, 
and controls that follow —notice that many of 
the recommendations for controlling pests and 
diseases don’t involve sprays or dusts at all.
You’ll find suggestions for proper site selec­
tion and preferred soil conditions, tips for 
avoiding or preventing conditions that pro­
mote pest and disease outbreaks, and recom­
mendations for steps you can take to prevent 
problems before they occur. That's because 
keeping plants healthy and preventing prob­
lems by proper plant selection and culture are 
two fundam ental principles of gardening 
organically.
Plan for Healthy Plants
Every minute of every day, the plants in 
your yard are defending themselves from their 
natural enemies. When a gust of wind breaks 
a branch from a tree, chemicals concentrated 
at the base of that branch mobilize into a 
protective wall to prevent pests from invading 
the healthy parts of the tree. When insects 
nibble on the leaves of a shrub, the plant may 
respond by changing its leaf chemistry to make 
itself less appetizing. As earthworms break off 
pieces of grass roots in their endless tunneling, 
the grass may turn injury into opportunity by 
growing two new roots where there used to 
be one.
Happy Equals Healthy
Maximizing natural resistance is one 
important way good gardeners keep their gar­
dens flourishing. Pests and disease organisms 
prefer plants that are weak, injured, or unable 
to adjust to the site on which they have been 
planted. For example, when planted in a hot, 
sunny site, rhododendrons and azaleas are 
more prone to attack by lace bugs, which 
aren't a major problem in shady sites. On the
2

PLAN FOR HEALTHY PLANTS 
■ 
3
other hand, when grown in a suitable climate 
and provided with healthy soil and an appro­
priate site, plants generally thrive and are highly 
resistant to problems. Most plants will have 
trouble-free lives if provided with growing con­
ditions that closely m atch their natural 
preferences. There generally isn’t much more 
the gardener needs to do to keep them happy 
and healthy. Plants forced to live in condi­
tions that don't suit their needs—with the 
wrong soil moisture level and sunlight expo­
sure, for example—are doomed from the start. 
Much of the intrigue of gardening involves 
discovering—or creating—the perfect grow­
ing situation for a special plant.
As you develop your garden, take time to 
study each site before you decide what to 
plant there. Then select plants that will thrive 
in the conditions available. If you match the 
plant to the site, you’re well on the way to a 
successful garden.
Bear in mind that some pests and dis­
eases can be prevented by site selection alone. 
For example, a site on which morning sun 
quickly dries leaves dampened by dew will 
help limit the conditions many molds and mil­
dews need to flourish. Site selection also can 
help limit insect-transmitted diseases. When 
beets are grown close to tomatoes, beet leaf- 
hoppers can easily carry a virus called curly 
top to tomatoes. Flea beetles normally cause 
only cosmetic damage to potatoes (tiny holes 
in the leaves), but can move on to corn and 
infect that crop with bacterial wilt. Whenever 
you learn that a pest common in your area 
serves as a vector for disease, separate host 
plants as much as possible, both physically 
and by crop timing, to help interrupt the pat­
tern of disease transmission.
Handle with Care
One of the best ways to keep plants healthy 
and happy is to treat them with care. Bruised 
or tom leaves, damaged stems, and other plant 
wounds not only cause unnecessary stress that
can weaken plants, they’re an open invitation 
to pests and disease organisms, which find it 
easy to enter plants through damaged tissue. 
Keep this in mind whenever you’re in your 
garden, and avoid handling plants whenever 
possible. Whenever you do need to work in 
your garden—even walk down the rows be­
tween plants—touch the plants gently to keep 
damage to a minimum. Never work around 
plants when they're wet. Many disease organ­
isms (and some pests, too) travel easily on the 
film of water that covers foliage on damp 
days. When you work among wet plants, you’re 
likely not only to help spread disease organisms, 
but also provide them with easy access to your 
plants via bruised leaves. Tugging on plants 
when you harvest fruit or pick flowers can 
damage roots and stems: Always use a sharp 
knife or pruning shears to make a clean cut 
that will heal easily. The same goes for 
proper pruning.
Handling trees with care is one of the 
best ways to keep them healthy. Many tree 
pests can only invade through the exposed 
tissue at an injury site. For example, flowering 
dogwood is normally a very insect-resistant 
tree, its trunk protected by a thick, hard bark. 
But when bits of bark are broken away, as 
when you hit a young dogwood with a lawn 
mower or string trimmer, that injury becomes 
a point of entry for dogwood borer larvae —a 
very difficult-to-control pest that eats its way 
through living wood.
Cultivate Healthy Soil
Cultivating healthy soil is at the founda­
tion of growing healthy plants. Good soil helps 
plants nurture themselves. Roots flourish in 
healthy soil. They’re able to find and use nutri­
ents as needed, which helps the plant grow 
strong and resilient.
When grown in poor, compacted soil that 
is low in nutrients, plants will grow weakly 
and be stressed by nutrient deficiencies. As a 
result, they’ll be easy prey for insects and

•I 
■ 
YOIK HEAIXHY GARDEN
Buying Healthy Plants
S
tarting out with the healthiest plants 
available is a greot way to ensure a healthy 
garden Use these tips to pick the best plants 
you can find.
■ Look for a sales display where the 
plants are well cared for. Plants subjected to 
hot, sunny sidewalks, allowed to wilt fre­
quently, and watered unevenly are never a 
bargain, no matter how cheap.
• 
Look at the entire group of plants being 
offered for sale. If some of the plants seem to 
be in poor health, shop somewhere else. Those 
that look healthy today may be diseased 
tomorrow.
■ Shop early in the season, when selec­
tion is good and plants are young.
■ Examine the roots. Gently shake a plant 
out of its container. Roots should be plentiful, 
but not wrapped into a tight spiral. With bare-
root plants, look for fungi, lesions, and broken 
tissue; prune them off before planting.
■ Consider plant color. Pole overall color 
indicates a need for nutrients, which is easy 
to correct. However, distinct yellow streaks or 
brown leaf spots indicate presence of disease.
■ Buy perennials, trees, and deciduous 
shrubs when they are dormant or just begin­
ning to bud out. Leaf emergence above ground 
is accompanied by rapid root growth below 
Get plants situated before this growth spurt 
occurs.
■ If bedding plants are already in flower, 
pinch off the blossoms when you set them 
out. Pinching will help direct the plant's energy 
into growing roots, so it will be better able to 
support more flowers and fruit later in the 
season.
compact growth
Whitefly infestation 
under leaves
Healthy
white
roots
Well-rooted but 
not pot bound
Healthy plant
Pot too small for plant 
Rootbound: many roots circling pot
Unhealthy plant
Copyrighted material

PLAN FOR HEALTHY P1ANTS ■ 
5
diseases. In contrast, soil that is fertile, well- 
drained, and teeming with communities of 
diverse microbes sharply increases a plant's 
chance at a healthy, productive life. Also, since 
many pest and disease organisms spend part 
or all of their lives below-ground, having a 
diverse community of organisms to keep them 
in check is important.
Healthy soil is an intricate mix of tiny 
rock particles, organic matter, water, air. 
microorganisms, and other animals. Living 
things abound in a robust, organically active 
soil —plant roots, animals, insects, bacteria, 
fungi, and other organisms. The more organic 
matter you provide, the livelier the life forms 
within your soil are likely to be. And, the 
livelier the soil life becomes, the more heated 
competition becomes between beneficial and 
benign soil microorganisms and those ca­
pable of doing harm.
Over time, adding organic matter improves 
soil structure, which in turn improves the soil’s 
ability to absorb and release water. Obviously, 
without water plants cannot thrive, but too 
much water can also sabotage plant health. 
When soil becomes saturated, and water pools 
up around plant roots, the roots may lose their 
ability to take up nutrients. Tiny root hairs 
may begin rotting away, followed by entire 
root branches. As organisms that cause root 
rot flourish, the plant may weaken. Above­
ground, the plant may be simultaneously 
attacked by molds and mildews encouraged 
by damp conditions. In this way, plants can 
easily die from too much water.
There is tremendous variation in how 
much water plants can use, and here, too, the 
question of natural resistance comes into play. 
Plants that are naturally adapted to wet condi­
tions are resistant to many of the pathogens 
present in chronically wet soil; those that grow 
naturally in dry or very well drained settings 
are easy prey to those same pathogens.
Local soil conditions have an important
bearing on what plants are best for your garden. 
Soil pH affects the availability of certain nutri­
ents to a plant, affecting its overall vigor, thus 
directly affecting its ability to maintain good 
health. Where soil tends to be very acidic, 
plants that like a low pH, such as blueberries 
and rhododendrons, will be much happier than 
plants such as asparagus and clematis, which 
require close monitoring and frequent appli­
cations of lime when grown in very acidic soil. 
Although soil pH is easy to manipulate using 
organic matter, mineral fertilizers, and mulches, 
it’s wise to consider the natural pH of your soil 
when choosing long-lived plants.
To help ensure that your soil is healthy 
and balanced, take the time to learn about its 
characteristics and fertility levels. It's a good 
idea to have it tested by the Cooperative Exten­
sion Service or by a private laboratory. Use 
the results as a guide to bring your soil into 
balance by adding lime, compost, or organic 
soil amendments and fertilizers as needed. 
Maintain soil balance by growing green manure 
crops and adding organic matter each season.
Select Trouble-Free Plants
Some plants are naturally prone to dis­
eases; others are like sparkling beacons to 
hungry insects. You can eliminate many prob­
lems in your garden by avoiding pest- or disease- 
prone plants. Instead, fill your property with 
dependable plants that can fend for themselves. 
In any climate, there are hundreds to choose 
from. With a solid collection of easy-to-grow 
plants in place, you can limit your pest-controI 
activities to plants you consider indispensable. 
Tomatoes are prone to pest problems, but 
most gardeners agree that vine-ripened toma­
toes are well worth the time and trouble they 
must take to select the best-adapted cultivars, 
create ideal soil conditions, and patrol the 
tomato plot regularly to stay on top of insect 
and disease activity.
Plants differ in their ability to defend

6 
■ YOUR HEALTHY GARDEN
themselves from pests and diseases, and choos­
ing resistant species and cultivars is another 
basic strategy for limiting pest problems. For 
example, instead of growing disease-prone 
hybrid tea roses, you can select from among 
the new, easier-to-satisfy cultivars of shrub 
roses, which require little care beyond occa­
sional pruning. In addition to the discussion 
of plant resistance on page 412, you’ll find 
many suggestions for disease- and insect- 
resistant cultivars throughout the “Problem- 
Solving Plant Guide*’ beginning on page 11. 
Planting them is often the best way to elimi­
nate a problem altogether. Remember, though, 
even with resistant plants, proper site selec­
tion and preparation are essential.
Feed Regularly
Although rich, well-fed soil is all many 
plants need to keep them growing vigorously, 
fertilizing them at the proper time is also 
beneficial and will help enhance their natural 
resistance to pests.
As a general rule, make sure annual vege­
table and flower crops are well-fed when they 
are young, and then give them a modest booster 
feeding when flowering and reproduction 
commences. Fertilize perennial vegetable and 
flower crops, along with trees and shrubs, 
during the first third of their active growth, 
which is just as they begin growing in spring. 
You can also fertilize during the second third 
of the plants’ growing season, but not during 
the last third. Late fertilization can stress the 
plants by encouraging tender new growth that 
may be winterkilled. When you apply fertilizer, 
always keep in mind that more isn't necessar­
ily better. Overfertilizing leads to rank, spin­
dly growth and can even worsen problems 
with aphids and some other pests.
Encourage Diversity
Any yard or garden is home to countless 
forms of microscopic life and hundreds of dif­
ferent kinds of insects as well as birds, toads, 
frogs, mammals, and humans. Relationships 
within this community are mind-boggling in 
their complexity, but encouraging a diverse 
community is a valuable way to ensure a healthy, 
trouble-free garden.
Rotate Crops
Crop rotation is one way diversity helps 
prevent problems in your garden. Consider 
what happens in a monoculture, such as a 
field planted year after year with corn. In the 
first year, some com pests, such as European 
corn borers and com  earworms, will find the 
field, eat their fill, and leave eggs or overwin­
tering pupae in the debris that remains after 
harvest. The following spring, the new gener­
ation of pests can get right to work feeding 
and reproducing themselves. The same is true 
for disease organisms that develop in the field. 
Favored host plants are easy to find and are 
available every year. As a consequence, pest 
populations can build out of all proportion.
Rotating (essentially taking away) a pest’s 
or disease's preferred host plant hampers its 
ability to feed and reproduce. If the cornfield 
were planted with wheat the following year, 
the borers and earworms would be forced to 
look someplace else for food. They could not 
continue to feed and build their populations 
on that site. Another example of crops that 
benefit from rotation is members of the cab­
bage family (Cruciferae). Many diseases such 
as black leg (a fungus) and black rot (a bacte­
rium) can quickly establish themselves in a 
cabbage patch. The first year's crop may get 
by with minimal damage, but if cabbage, 
broccoli, cauliflower, or other crucifers are 
planted there again the following year, the 
disease organisms are ready and waiting to 
infect defenseless young plants. Rotating cab­
bage family members with crops that belong 
to other plant families breaks the disease cycle. 
For more on crop rotation, see page 415.
Fortunately, rotation generally isn’t nec­

ENCOURAGE DIVERSITY ■ 
7
essary for long-lived plants such as trees and 
shrubs, because they have developed their 
own pest-control strategies that enable them 
to live long, trouble-free lives. (Unless, of course, 
you lose a tree to a soilborne diseases such as 
Verticillium wilt, in which case you shouldn’t 
replace it with another susceptible species.) 
Below ground, trees and shrubs may release 
chemicals into the soil that act as natural 
pesticides to soilborne fungi and bacteria. 
Above ground, their tough, woody stems help 
resist bruising and insect attacks. When leaves 
are lost to disease, a shrub or tree has the 
ability to produce new leaves several times. 
When leaf-eating insects dine on tree leaves, 
the tree may respond by pumping more tannic 
acid into the leaves that remain, thus deter­
ring further feeding.
Avoid Monocultures
Planting a wide variety of plants is another 
way to foil pests and diseases by encouraging 
diversity. Conventional lawns, a type of 
monoculture, are a good example. Planting a 
mixture of lawn grasses (especially disease- 
resistant ones) will help prevent diseases from 
sweeping through your lawn, because some 
plants will be susceptible and others won't. 
Replacing some of your lawn areas with a 
variety of tough groundcovers will also increase 
the overall diversity of the home landscape. 
It’s an excellent alternative for sites on which 
lawn grasses won’t naturally thrive.
The importance of using diversity is espe­
cially apparent if you look at long-lived plants 
such as trees and shrubs. Using a large plant­
ing of a single species of tree or shrub to 
screen a busy roadway, or planting the same 
shade tree that all your neighbors have, are 
two more examples of monocultures. A dev­
astating pest or disease that appears on the 
scene can easily move from plant to plant and 
damage or wipe out the entire planting in a 
single season. Dutch elm disease, which deci­
mated American elm plantings along thou­
sands of American streets in the mid- 1900s, is 
a perfect example of the dangers of mass plant­
ing single species. If you’ve planted a variety 
of trees and shrubs for screening or shade, 
you have built-in protection.
Companion planting is another way to 
use diversity—and avoid monocultures—to foil 
pests. Mixing marigolds or strong-smelling herbs 
in the vegetable garden, as opposed to plant­
ing solid blocks or rows of a single crop, is 
effective, because many pests locate crops by 
smell. Interplanting can “hide” a crop by mask­
ing the odor that attracts pests. Some com­
panion plants work by repelling pests. For 
example, basil is said to repel tomato hom- 
worms. For more on the many ways compan­
ion planting can be used to control pests and 
diseases, see page 419.
Encourage Natural Predators
Encouraging a diverse community of insect 
predators is another way organic gardeners 
manage pests. Beneficials. the term usually 
used for insect-predatory and parasitic insects 
and arachnids, such as spiders and mites, play 
a vital role in the complex community that 
naturally exists in your yard. Many actively 
help plants reproduce by spreading pollen; 
others consume or parasitize destructive pests. 
Beneficials such as lady beetles and honey­
bees are well-known. Other effective benefi­
cials include lacewings and assassin bugs. For 
more on beneficials, see pages 258 and 453.
Birds are among the most efficient insect 
predators. When you consider that chicka­
dees spend much of their time during the 
winter eating aphid eggs or that Baltimore 
orioles can eat up to 17 tent caterpillars a 
minute, you won't wonder why many garden­
ers want to attract birds to their yards. Plant­
ing trees and shrubs that provide food and 
shelter, along with providing a source of fresh 
water year-round, will go a long way toward 
encouraging birds to visit your yard.
And for consuming slugs, cutworms, and

8 
■ 
YOl R HEALTHY GARDEN
other ground-dwelling pests, nothing beats a 
resident toad! Be sure to provide shelter and 
water for these hard-working garden residents.
Develop a System
Keeping plants thriving, improving your 
soil, planting a variety of plants, and encour­
aging natural predators are all great ways to 
prevent pest and disease problems, but plan­
ning and record keeping are also essential 
weapons to add to your arsenal. A garden plan 
will help you develop a calendar of activities 
aimed at preventing problems. It will also help 
you set and achieve goals for your garden, 
such as eliminating or modifying problem- 
prone plantings or adding new gardens. Regu­
lar record keeping will help you know when to 
expect problems so you can get a head start 
on them.
Start your plan by finding out about the 
plants you're growing as well as the ones you 
want to grow. Learn what conditions they pre­
fer and which will grow best in your area. 
Next, draw a sketch of your garden. Mark 
down existing plantings, but also look for sites 
that might suit some plants but discourage 
others. For example, locate frost pockets, sites 
where air will circulate freely, areas with moist 
soil, and shady or sunny spots.
Then identify and list the problems you've 
had in the past or that are common in your 
area. Use the "Problem-Solving Plant Guide" 
on the pages that follow to identify problems 
you’ve seen in your garden before. Learn about 
the life cycles of these pests and diseases. 
How do they overwinter? When and how do 
they attack your plants?
Once you have all your options—and 
potential problems—in front of you, make a 
comprehensive plan. Next, list the ways you 
could help control each of the problems on 
your list. Decide what cultural controls will 
help prevent problems and when they need to 
be done. Add the biological and physical con­
trols next, and make note of organic sprays 
and dusts for use as a last resort. Be sure to 
include the life cycle stage at which each con­
trol is mos* effective. It may help to make a 
chart of the life cycle and control activities.
Use these notes to create a schedule of 
gardening activities. You’ll find that certain 
chores, such as an annual fall cleanup, are 
well worth the effort because they'll prevent 
many types of pests. Planning ahead and fol­
lowing your schedule will enable you to make 
full use of preventive control measures, and 
they'll soon become second nature to you. 
You’ll also know what tools and materials to 
have on hand to fight problems if they arise.
Learn to Look
All the planning in the world won't help if 
you don't keep an eye out for problems. Begin 
a garden journal for keeping records through­
out the season. Make it a habit to walk through 
your garden at least once a week—daily is best. 
Look carefully at your plants, turning over 
leaves, and note overall appearance.
In your garden records, include pest 
appearance dates and details of insect behav­
ior along with notes you make on the progress 
of various plants. This is the only way to dis­
cover useful facts, such as when birds are no 
longer effective cabbageworm predators on 
cabbage, cauliflower, or broccoli, or which 
members of the huge daisy family are first to 
be attacked by four-lined plant bugs.
If you notice plants that don't look healthy 
or aren't growing the way you’d expected, take 
time to examine them more closely. Look for 
signs of the problems you listed, and go over 
your plan to see what steps you need to take. 
Use the “Pest Patrol Checklist** on the opposite 
page to gather the information you need to 
diagnose the problem. Once you've diagnosed 
the problem and identified the ways to con­
trol it. add the necessary information to your 
garden plan.
Keep notes on your program during the

Dl-Yl.LOP A SYSTEM 
■ 
9
Pest Patrol Checklist
I
n general plant problems are divided into 
three main types.- pests (including insects, 
mites, nematodes, even gophers ond mice), 
diseases (such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi), 
and physiological problems (like nutrient and 
wcter imbalances, too much or too little light, 
or extreme temperatures). These conditions 
can interact, or one condition might predis­
pose the plants to another. For example, root 
maggots tunneling in roots directly damage 
them, but the reason the plants may subse­
quently die is because rot organisms invade 
the damaged areas and then spread through 
the entire root system.
Diagnosing a pest problem on a plant is 
easiest if you catch the culprit in the act; then 
it's just a matter of identifying the pest. But 
reaching a diagnosis often takes patience 
and careful observation, because the insect 
that caused the damage may only feed ot 
night or underground. In addition, insect dam­
age often resembles infections from fungi or 
viruses, nutrient deficiencies might look like a 
viral disease or vice versa. In these cases 
use the steps below to collect as much infor­
mation as you can. Then use the plant, insect, 
ond disease encyclopedia sections of this 
book to determine the cause of the problem.
1. Examine the entire afflicted plant and 
note the range of abnormal symptoms. Is the 
entire plant affected or just a part of it? If o 
part is offected, what part? Do you see symp- 
lom s only on the new growth or old growth, 
or on a single branch? Is just one plant affected, 
or do you see symptoms along on entire row? 
if plants are affected randomly within a row 
or bed, ond the symptoms do not spread to 
rhe other plants, the problem is probably not 
an infectious disease. Clusters of plants show­
ing symptoms may indicate disease, or jusi a 
pocket of poor soil.
2. Examine both the affected areos and 
healthy portions of the plant with a magnify­
ing glass. Inspect the leaves, especially on 
the undersides, stems, flowers, and roots, if 
possible. Look for signs of hidden damage, 
such as borer holes in stems or fine webbing 
on the undersides of leaves. To avoid dam ag­
ing roots when you observe them, dig the 
plants rather than pulling them from the 
ground. Carefully wash soil off the roots for 
easier inspection.
3. Check the condition of the soil. Is it 
poorly aerated, encouraging roof rots or at 
least poor rool function? Or is the soil droughty, 
so plants wilt from lack of water? If soil 
conditions are poor, root systems moy not be 
able to spread in search of nutrients, and 
plants in that area may suffer from nutrient 
deficiencies.
4. Collect any insects associated with 
the ailing plant, or take samples of damaged 
leaves. Seal samples in pill bottles or clear 
plastic bags.
5. Use the information you've gathered 
to narrow down the possible causes, using 
the information and photographs in this book. 
You may also want to refer to other insect, 
disease, and horticulture handbooks for help 
in confirming your diagnosis and identifying 
species and for advice on how to deal with 
the problem.
6. If you are still stumped, review every­
thing you know about the conditions pre­
ferred by the plant, correct any environmen­
tal or nutritional deficiencies, and give the 
plants the best care you can. Many unex­
plained afflictions are physiological in origin 
and plants often grow out of them when 
conditions improve. Bear in mind that nutri­
ent problems will take weeks or even months 
to correct. If more plants in the row become 
affected, as might happen it disease is 
spreading, pull and discard the damaged plants 
to reduce the source of disease.

10 
■ YOUR HEALTHY GARDEN
Cultural Questions
U
se the following questions to help organ­
ize your thinking about the causes for 
garden problems and the possible ways you 
could prevent them by improving plant culture.
■ Is the plant growing in an appropriate 
soil type with the kind of exposure and drain­
age it requires? Is the pH within tolerable 
limits? Should you move the plant? If so. 
when is the best time?
■ Are climatic factors limiting the plant's 
growth? Could windbreaks, winter protection, 
early planting, or use of a different species 
solve the problem?
■ Have you given the plant too little or 
too much fertilizer’ Have you fertilized it at 
the appropriate times?
■ How severe is the dam age? Is it cos­
metic or is the plant's health really deteriorat­
ing? If you have seen this pest before, did the 
affected plants outgrow the problem?
• 
Is the pest soilborne and/or indige­
nous and likely to appear year after year?
■ Have you followed appropriate crop 
rotations?
■ Is the plant surrounded by good com­
panions or bad ones?
■ Can you remove affected plant parts 
to stop the progress of the pest?
■ For insect pests: Does the pest fly, 
jump, or remain stationary’ Are other plants 
likely to become infested? Are natural preda­
tors present?
■ Is the plant too old to adequately defend 
itself? Could healthy replacement plants solve 
the problem?
■ Could you replace the plant with one 
that is resistant to the problem?
■ Have you chosen the control with the 
most limited environmental impact?
■ Are there routine garden tosks you 
could use, such as annually raking and remov­
ing afflicted leaves, to control the problem?
■ Have you made plans for nurturing 
follow-up core to help the plant recover from 
the pest challenge?
season. Write down what works and what 
doesn’t, what controls you used, how much 
you used, and where. The more information 
you have, the better you'll be able to refine 
the plan for the next season.
The more time you spend in your garden, 
the better you will be able to recognize, 
understand, and treat pest problems. When 
you consider pest problems thoughtfully, you 
may be surprised at how little damage actu­
ally has occurred. Many plants can tolerate 
up to 30 percent loss of foliage without suffer­
ing serious cuts in productivity. And. although 
leaves with little holes in them don't look nice, 
they may actually help the plant defend itself
by triggering the production of pest-repelling 
chemicals.
You'll also gain a greater appreciation for 
just how well plants can keep themselves 
healthy, given the opportunity. Even in the 
middle of summer, when pest problems are 
most severe, bear in mind that the crisis will 
pass and your plants will get another chance 
with each new season. Plants have been mak­
ing use of these second chances, devising their 
own self-defense tricks and strategies, since 
time began. Learning and using natural pest- 
control maneuvers gets you involved in these 
adventures, which are part of the fun and 
fascination of gardening.

PROBLEM-SOLVING 
PLANT GUIDE
U s e  this encyclopedia of over 200 popular 
garden plants to help diagnose, prevent, and 
control problems throughout your garden. 
Individual plant entries include symptoms for 
the most common garden problems you may 
encounter, suggestions for cultural measures 
that help prevent problems, and control op­
tions for specific pest and disease problems.
Food plants—vegetables, fruits, and 
herbs—are listed by common name. However, 
ornamentals—annuals, bulbs, perennials, and 
trees, shrubs, and vines—are listed by botani­
cal name. If you don’t know the botanical 
name of a particular plant, there are two quick 
ways to look it up. Fbr example, suppose you 
want information on disease problems of lilacs, 
and can’t find a Lilac entry. One option is to 
look up lilac in the index. It will refer you to 
the Syringa index entry, where you’ll find page 
listings. Or, you can turn to “Common and 
Botanical Names of Plants" on page 487, look 
up lilac, find the botanical name Syringa, and 
then go to the Syringa entry in this section of 
the book.
The entries are designed to help you 
quickly zero in on specific plant problems. In 
the “Problems” section of each entry, you’ll 
find short descriptions of symptoms in bold­
face type, such as “Leaves with yellow, V-shaped 
spots on margins.” Scan these descriptions 
until you find the one that most closely matches 
the problem on your plant. You can then read 
that section in the entry to learn the cause of
the problem and how to avoid or control it.
In addition to the individual plant entries, 
you’ll also find separate general entries on 
annuals, bulbs, herbs, lawns, perennials, and 
vegetables, along with an entry on trees, shrubs, 
and vines. These general entries highlight prob­
lems that attack a wide variety of plants. You'll 
find them useful for solving some of the most 
common problems that attack your garden.
If you're using this guide to diagnose a 
specific plant problem, always be sure your 
diagnosis is correct before deciding on a con­
trol strategy. If you want more help in identify­
ing a specific problem, you'll find photographs 
and descriptions of specific insects and dis­
eases in the “Insect Identification Guide" begin­
ning on page 268 and in the “Disease Symptom 
Guide" beginning on page 370.
For more detailed information on how to 
safely and effectively use specific controls, 
refer to “Organic Controls" beginning on page 
404. Controls are divided into four categories: 
cultural, physical, biological, and organically 
acceptable chemical controls. If you're not 
sure which category a particular control belongs 
to, your best bet is to look it up in the index.
Descriptions of the controls include infor­
mation on the protection they offer, toxicity 
to nonpest organisms, and any possible haz­
ards related to their use. When choosing a 
control strategy, always start with the lowest- 
impact control possible, and only use chemi­
cal controls as a last resort.
il

A
Abies
Fir. Trees.
Firs are cone-bearing evergreens with nee­
dlelike foliage and a symmetrical form, espe­
cially when young. They make impressive 
specimens or, in groups, effective dark back­
grounds and tall screens.
Firs grow best under cool, moist condi­
tions; they do not thrive in hot. dry climates. 
Set container-grown or balled-and-burlapped 
plants into acid, moist but well-drained soil, 
preferably in spring. Full sun is best, but firs 
will grow well (with a somewhat more open 
habit) in partial shade. Fir trees are seldom 
bothered by insects or diseases in the land­
scape. Planting healthy trees in the right condi­
tions will help the plants avoid most potential 
pest problems.
Problems
Needles deformed. Cause: Balsam twig 
aphids. This '/»" long, greenish aphid has a 
white waxy coating. It feeds primarily on suc­
culent new growth and exudes sticky honeydew, 
which covers the needles. Most of the damage 
occurs in late spring to early summer. Control 
with insecticidal soap, or spray with pyrethrin 
for severe infestations.
Needles light gray or bronze. Cause: 
Spruce spider mites. These tiny, spiderlike 
pests damage needles as they feed; the injury 
weakens the plant and can kill young trees. 
Mites start feeding on lower, older needles 
and progress upward and outward; tiny webs 
may be visible on needles. Control in spring 
with dormant oil before growth starts. During 
active growth, spray plants repeatedly with 
strong jets of water or make 2 applications 
of insecticidal soap 7-10 days apart: apply 
pyrethrin for severe infestations.
Branches defoliated. Cause: Hemlock 
loopers. The 1" long, greenish yellow, black- 
spotted caterpillars usually appear in June. 
They feed on the needles, starting from the 
branch tips and working toward the center of 
the plant. Handpick small populations; con­
trol large infestations with BTK.
Branches with brown tips. Cause: Spruce 
budworms. These brown, 1" caterpillars have 
white dots on their backs. They start tunnel­
ing into older needles and gradually migrate 
to opening buds. Damaged needles turn brown 
and drop; you may see tiny webs on shoot tips. 
Prune off affected branch tips or handpick if 
only a few pests are present. Spray severe 
infestations with BTK.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoon­
like bags. Cause: Bagworms. See “Plant defo­
liated: branches bear cocoonlike bags” on 
page 236.
12

ACER ■ 
13
Acer
Maple. Trees.
Maples are a large group of easy-to-grow, 
15-100' trees with opposite leaves and dis­
tinctive, 2-winged fruit. They are popular as 
street or specimen trees.
In general, maples prefer rich, moist hut 
well-drained, acidic soil and a sunny position. 
Some smaller species, such as Japanese maples 
(Acerpalmatum), need at least partial shade. 
Set out maples in spring as container-grown 
or balled-and-burlapped plants.
Although they can host a range of pests, 
most maples survive nicely with little or no 
spraying. Note that oil sprays and insecticidal 
soaps may damage some maples; before using 
either product, note restrictions on the label 
and use with caution. Test on a few leaves 
before treating the whole plant.
Problems
Leaves with brown, dry edges. Cause: 
Leaf scorch. Caused by lack of water or 
reflected heat from surrounding pavement, 
this damage is often a problem on newly planted 
trees. Avoid by keeping soil around the tree 
evenly moist: a 2"-3" thick layer of mulch 
keeps roots cool and retains moisture.
Leaves yellow; whole plant weakened. 
Cause: Maple scales. Both maple phenacoccus 
and cottony maple scale produce small, fluffy, 
white egg masses. They feed on leaves and 
stems, weakening the plant. Spray the trunk 
and branches with dormant oil before growth 
starts in spring, or with superior oil or insecti­
cidal soap as buds begin to open. Repeat the 
soap or superior oil application in midsummer, 
spraying the leaves and branches.
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac- 
nose. See “Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves
with moist or brown sunken spots’ on page 
238 for more details on this disease.
Leaves distorted or bumpy. Cause: Mites. 
Several different mites attack maple leaves, 
causing pointed or wartlike swellings in vari­
ous colors. Although they are unsightly, galls 
don’t seriously threaten tree health. Pick off 
damaged leaves, or apply dormant oil in early 
spring, before growth starts.
Leaves, shoots, or seeds distorted. Cause: 
Boxelder bugs. These W  long bugs have 
charcoal-colored wings with red veins. They 
feed on leaves, flowers, and fruit and often 
congregate on tree trunks. Spray plants with 
superior oil or insecticidal soap when pests 
first appear.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes. 
Cause: Caterpillars. See “Leaves skeletonized 
or with large holes; branches may be webbed” 
on page 236 for details.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with pow­
dery white coating” on page 237 for controls.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots” on page 237 for details.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See "Leaves wrinkled and discolored” 
on page 235 for control information.
Branches wilt. Cause: Verticillium wilt. 
Parts of trees infected with this fungal disease 
may wilt suddenly or produce leaves that are 
yellow or smaller than normal. Cut and destroy 
or dispose of affected branches. Trees may 
recover if you provide extra water and fertil­
izer to promote strong, new, healthy growth. 
Remove severely infected trees: don’t replant 
another maple in the same spot.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
"Trunks or branches with oozing lesions; branch 
tips die back” on page 238 for details.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. See “Trunk 
or branches with small holes; limbs die or 
break o ff’ on page 238 for controls.

14 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Achillea
Yarrow. Perennials.
These hardy, easy-to-grow, mid-border 
perennials prosper in well-drained soil in full 
sun. They thrive on heat, need little water 
once established, and enjoy poor soil. Overly 
rich soil or excess fertilization gives poor growth 
and few flowers. Leaves are feathery and grayish 
green. Tiny yellow, red, or white flowers form 
dense, broadly flattened clusters from spring 
to midsummer. Plants form vigorous clumps 
that can spread; divide regularly for best 
performance.
Leaves of crowded plants in moist, humid, 
shady conditions may develop white or gray 
powdery patches of powdery mildew; see 
“Leaves covered with white powder” on page 
177 for controls. Thin such plants to improve 
air circulation: avoid watering late in the day.
Aesculus
Horse chestnut. Trees and shrubs.
These deciduous plants have 3"-10" long, 
opposite, compound leaves with 3-9 leaflets. 
The larger species are used as specimens or 
street trees; the shrubs are best in mass plant­
ings or shrub borders.
All of these species thrive in moist, well- 
drained soil rich in organic matter. The tree 
forms do best in full sun, while the shrub kinds 
will flourish in conditions ranging from full 
sun to partial shade. Note that insecticidal 
soap sprays may damage some horse chest­
nuts; read the label before applying and use 
with caution. Test spray on a few leaves before 
spraying the whole plant.
Problems
Leaves with irregular brown spots. Cause: 
Leaf blotch. Caused by a fungus, these spots 
may spread over leaves and lead to defoliation. 
Clean up and destroy fallen leaves to remove 
overwintering spores.
Leaves with brown, dry edges. Cause: 
Leaf scorch. This symptom indicates weak or 
damaged roots or poor soil conditions; it is 
caused by lack of water or by heat reflected 
from surrounding pavement. Avoid by plant­
ing in rich, evenly moist soil and irrigating, if 
necessary, in very dry seasons.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with pow­
dery white coating” on page 237 for controls.
Leaves skeletonized. Causes: White- 
marked tussock moths; Japanese beetles. 
Whitemarked tussock moths are Vh" long; 
yellow caterpillar has 4 clumps of white hair 
on its back, along with 2 tufts of black hair on 
the head and 1 at the rear. Birds and natural 
parasites usually keep this pest under control. 
If damage occurs, reduce future populations 
by scraping the frothy white egg masses off 
trunks and branches. Band trunks with a sticky 
coating, such as Tanglefoot, to catch caterpil­
lars as they crawl up the tree. Spray leaves 
with BTK to control serious infestations.
Japanese beetles also skeletonize leaves. 
See “Leaves skeletonized” on page 236 for 
control measures.
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac- 
nose. See “Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves 
with moist or brown sunken spots" on page 
238 for details on this fungal disease.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
“Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; branch 
tips die back” on page 238 for details.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. See “Plant defoli­
ated; branches bear cocoonlike bags” on page 
236 for controls.

ALBIZIA 
■ 
15
Ageratum
Ageratum, flossflower. Annuals.
The soft lavender, blue, or pink flower 
clusters of ageratum are a beautiful addition 
to the flower garden. Plants grow 6"-36" high 
and about 1' wide. They bloom from early 
summer to first frost. Ageratums also make 
good container plants.
Direct-seeding ageratum doesn’t always 
give good results. Fbr better germination, sow 
seeds indoors 8 weeks before the last frost. 
Seeds need light, so don't cover them; expect 
germination in about 10 days. Initial seedling 
growth is slow. Many gardeners prefer the 
ease of starting with nursery plants.
Ageratum grows best in fertile, well-drained 
soil on a sunny site with good air circulation. 
Poor soil and insufficient water cause plant 
browning. Too much shade causes decreased 
flowering and legginess. Remove spent flower 
heads to promote more blooms. Feed plants 
with a general-purpose fertilizer once a month. 
The first frost turns plants black.
Problems
Leaves yellow; plant weakened. Cause; 
Whiteflies. For control measures, see “Leaves 
yellow; plant weakened” on page 18.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See “Leaves stippled with 
yellow; foliage webbed” on page 18.
Plant wilts. Cause: Fungal wilt. Various 
fungi thrive in the moist, fertile soil ageratums 
require. They attack roots, causing plant stunt­
ing and wilting. Wilting may begin at lower 
leaves and progress toward the upper ones, or 
it may occur rapidly. If the plant is pulled up, 
you'll see the roots are dark brown and rotting. 
Discard infected plants. Improve drainage and 
lighten the soil with organic matter.
Ajuga
Ajuga, bugieweed. Perennials.
These hardy groundcovers favor partial 
shade and moist, well-drained soil. Flower spikes 
appear spring to summer over mats of dark 
green, bronze, or burgundy leaves. Common 
bugieweed (Ajuga replans) spreads vigorously 
via stolons, desirable for a slope, less so in a 
lawn. Other species are more easily controlled. 
Set plants 6" apart for rapid coverage.
Excess moisture, especially in heavy, 
slow-draining soils, encourages crown and root 
rots caused by soil-dwelling fungi. Dark spots 
appear on the crown and leaves of infected 
plants; roots blacken. Controls are cultural: 
Avoid planting ajuga in wet areas; cultivate to 
improve air circulation. Remove infected plants 
and surrounding soil; do not compost dis­
eased plants. Clean up debris in fall to limit 
places where fungi overwinter.
Albizia
Albizia, mimosa, silk tree. Trees.
Mimosas are deciduous trees growing to 
40' high, with finely textured foliage and pink 
blooms. They are easy to transplant. Mimosas 
flower best in full sun. They can adapt to a 
range of soil conditions.
Because of their insect and disease prob­
lems, mimosas are usually short-lived. Mimosa 
webworms, 1" long, brown caterpillars, bind 
leaves with webs and skeletonize foliage. 
Remove and destroy nests; spray leaves with 
BTK, or with pyrethrin as a last resort. Mimosa 
wilt produces wilted leaves and dead branches. 
Remove and destroy infected trees.
op*

16 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Alcea 
Allium
Hollyhock. Biennials.
Hardy hollyhocks create an excellent back­
drop for a perennial border and offer blooms 
in shades of red, pink, purple, yellow, and 
white. Hollyhocks grow 5-9' tall, bearing mid­
summer spikes of fluffy single or double flowers, 
up to 4" wide.
Sun-loving and free-flowering, hollyhocks 
prosper in rich, heavy, moist, well-drained soils, 
but will thrive in ordinary soils, too. Plant 2' 
apart in a site sheltered from wind. Most culti­
vars require staking.
Problems
Leaf surfaces pale; powdery orange spots 
beneath. Cause: Rust. Hollyhock's most com­
mon disease also deforms leaves and stems 
and causes early leaf drop. Its orange spots 
release fungal spores that spread via wind and 
rain. Grow resistant cultivars; keep leaves dry 
and encourage good air circulation. In prob­
lem areas, apply wettable sulfur several weeks 
before rust normally appears. Remove and 
destroy infected plant parts.
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Leaf-feeding 
beetles. Japanese beetles are prime suspects 
here, although other beetles, such as spotted 
cucumber beetles and rose chafers, may also 
attack. Handpick or spray with a solution of 1 
tablespoon 70 percent isopropyl alcohol to 1 
pint prepared pyrethrin mixture. Repeat every 
3-5 days until beetles are gone.
Buds and leaves deformed or dwarfed. 
Cause: True bugs. Several of the true bugs 
injure hollyhocks with their piercing-sucking 
mouthparts and release a toxin that deforms 
plants. See “Buds and leaves deformed or 
dwarfed" on page 178 for control information.
Allium. Bulbs.
Related to onions and garlic, but much 
prettier, ornamental alliums bloom in shades 
of blue, purple, pink, while, and yellow. Allium 
foliage may be rounded and hollow like onion 
leaves or straplike and solid: when bruised, 
the leaves release the pungent fragrance asso­
ciated with culinary alliums. The blossoms, 
however, may have a pleasant floral smell. 
Small star- or bell-shaped flowers cluster in 
2"-9" globes atop leafless stems in early summer. 
Plants range from 6" to 5' tall.
Plant allium bulbs in fall at a depth roughly 
3 times the bulbs' diameter. Select a site with 
full sun and well-drained soil; taller species 
may need some protection from wind. Water 
regularly throughout the growing season, but 
avoid excess moisture, which encourages rots. 
Allium foliage dies back shortly after flower­
ing ends. If division is needed to reduce 
crowding, separate bulblets after foliage dies 
back: replant immediately.
Problems
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. Slugs and snails may feed on 
foliage; see “Leaves with large, ragged holes’* 
on page 50.
Leaves with silver-white streaks. Cause: 
Onion thrips. These ‘/ s o "- 1/ * "  thrips suck sap 
from foliage; severe infestations stunt plants 
and may impair flowering. Thrips are hard to 
control because they burrow into plant tissue. 
Remove and destroy infested plant parts; 
encourage predators such as pirate bugs, 
lacewings, and lady beetles. Clean up debris 
where thrips overwinter. Monitor and trap thrips 
with blue sticky traps. Apply insecticidal soap 
sprays regularly once pests appear on traps.
Copyrighted material

ANEMONE 
■ 
17
Almond
Pnmus dulcis var. dulcis ( Rosaccae)
Almonds are deciduous trees that grow 
to about 20' and bloom in early spring. Nuts 
are borne on short-lived spurs—short branches 
that elongate only a fraction of an inch per 
year. Almonds are hardy in Zones 6-9.
Grow almonds where summers are hot 
and dry. in sunny sites, free from late spring 
frosts. To set nuts, many cultivars need cross- 
pollination; others, such as ‘All-in-One,’ are 
self-pollinating. The cultivar‘Archedoise’ resists 
many fungal diseases. Almonds and peaches 
belong to the same genus and are affected by 
similar insects and diseases. For more infor­
mation on problems and solutions, see the 
Peach entry beginning on page 164.
Problems
Blossoms shriveled, covered with fuzzy 
gray masses. Cause: Brown rot. Nut hulls 
also may rot. To control this fungal disease, 
harvest nuts early, just when hulls begin to 
split. Before spring growth begins, remove 
infected nuts and twigs with sunken lesions. 
For greater control, spray with sulfur or copper.
Nuts disappear. Cause: Squirrels and 
other pests. For more information, see "Stop­
ping Animal Pests" on page 408.
Growing shoots wilted or dying. Causes: 
Oriental fruit moths; peach twig borers. Both 
pests tunnel into growing shoots and cause 
wilting. For information on controls, see “Grow­
ing shoots wilted or dying" on page 166.
Leaves with small purple spots, some spots 
with centers missing. Cause: Shothole disease. 
Centers of leaf spots often enlarge to about
then fall out. For more information on 
this fungal disease, see “Leaves with small 
purple spots, some spots with centers missing" 
on page 167.
Amaranthus
Amaranth. Annuals.
Their colorful leaves or drooping flower 
clusters make these plants ideal focal points 
in the garden. They grow from V to 6' tall, 
depending on the species and cultivar. The 
leaves or flowers also stand out in cut flower 
arrangements.
Amaranth seedlings do not transplant well, 
so direct-seed in early summer when night 
temperatures are consistently 60°F or above. 
Water and feed seedlings regularly only until 
their colors appear. Thin 1-2' apart. Ama­
ranth markedly prefers hot, dry, sunny areas 
and poor to average soil. Excess fertility causes 
dull foliage and weak stems. Overwatering 
leads to root rot, causing stems, crowns, and 
roots to turn brown or black. Once it begins, 
there is no cure, so the best control is prevention.
Anemone
Anemone, windflower. l\ibers.
Tuberous species of anemones include 
low-growing Grecian windflower (Anemone 
blanda), a 6"-8" plant with deeply divided 
leaves and daisylike, blue, pink, or white flow­
ers, and showy, 7'-15" poppy anemone [A. 
coronaria), a more tender plant (Zone 8) with 
single or semidouble blooms in deep shades 
of red, blue, violet, and white. Both species 
bloom in early spring.
Soak tubers overnight in warm water before 
planting in fall. Plant tubers 3" deep in light 
shade in richly organic, neutral to slightly 
alkaline, well-drained soil. Windflower tubers
Copyrighted

18 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
often lack an obvious top and bottom; plant 
them on their sides, so stems grow up and 
roots grow down. Tubers planted sideways have 
a better chance of growing than those planted 
upside down. Poppy anemone tubers resem­
ble claws; plant claw side down. Plantings 
expand slowly. Divide crowded clumps in late 
summer after foliage dies down, making sure 
each piece has a bud. Dust with a copper- 
based fungicide or sulfur and let dry for 2 days 
in a shady, airy spot before replanting.
Problems
Foliage disappears. Causes: Animal pests; 
slugs and snails. Birds and rabbits are quite 
fond of early anemone leaves. Cover young 
plants with netting if the problem is severe 
enough to warrant control. See “Stopping 
Animal Pests" on page 408 for control infor­
mation.
Slugs and snails also eat anemone leaves; 
see “Leaves with large, ragged holes’ on page 
50 for controls.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. These 
tiny pests occasionally trouble anemones. See 
“Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects" on page 51 for con­
trol information.
Annuals
Controlling pests and diseases on annual 
plants is largely a matter of prevention. Annu­
als die naturally after 1 season, so insect and 
disease control is less critical than on more 
permanent plants. Sometimes, though, pest 
problems can cut short the bloom season and 
your enjoyment of the flowering annuals, so 
you'll need to be aware of the few potential
problems. Check the individual entries, or see 
the text below for common problems.
Leaf Problems
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed.
Cause: Spider mites. These tiny, spiderlike 
pests generally feed on the undersides of plant 
leaves. They suck sap from plant leaves, ini­
tially causing a yellow flecking on the upper 
leaf surfaces. Severe infestations can cause 
leaves to turn yellow or white; damaged leaves 
will eventually turn brown and drop. Tiny 
webs may be evident on leaves and stem tips.
Control spider mites by spraying plants 
thoroughly with water (especially the under­
sides of the leaves) 2-3 times a day for several 
days. For severe infestations, spray plants with 
insecticidal soap twice, 2-3 days apart.
Leaves yellow; plant weakened. Cause: 
Whiteflies. These tiny, white, mothlike flies 
and their flattened, scalelike larvae feed on 
leaves, sucking out the plant juices. The adults 
often fly up in a cloud when you disturb an 
infested plant. Whiteflies secrete a sugary sub­
stance called honeydew, which makes leaves 
sticky and may encourage the growth of sooty 
mold fungus; see “Leaves with black coating" 
below for more information.
Eliminating garden weeds helps keep 
whitefly populations down. A few yellow sticky 
traps in the area may catch whiteflies and 
other pest bugs, but also some beneficials 
later in the season. Try introducing green lace- 
wings into the garden. Spray leaves with insec­
ticidal soap every 3 days for 2 weeks, paying 
special attention to lower leaf surfaces. Use 
pyrethrin as a last resort.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. Slugs and snails range in size 
from '/«" to 8" and may be gray, tan, green, 
black, yellow, or spotted. A thick layer of 
mulch and plants with low-growing leaves pro­
vide shady hiding places from which these 
pests emerge to feed at night. All species rasp

ANNUALS ■ 
19
large holes in leaves and stems; slimy trails of 
mucus also signal their presence.
To deter these pests, sprinkle bands of 
coarse, dry, scratchy materials, such as cinders, 
wood ashes, cedar sawdust, and diatomaceous 
earth, around plants or beds to irritate the soft 
bodies of these pests; renew frequently. Push 
4"-8" copper strips into the soil around beds 
as edging. Lay boards, cabbage leaves, or over­
turned clay pots—anything that offers a cool, 
damp daytime haven—around the garden; 
destroy pests that congregate underneath. Hand- 
pick slugs and snails from plants at night; 
drop them into soapy water or sprinkle them 
with table salt to dehydrate and kill them. Set 
out shallow pans of beer; remove drowned 
pests daily.
Leaves with black coating. Cause; Sooty 
mold. This fungus grows on the sugary, sticky 
honeydew produced by aphids, scales, white­
flies, and mealybugs. The black fungal coat­
ing doesn’t harm leaves directly, but it does 
shade the leaves and reduce growth.
The best control is to deal with the pests 
that are producing the honeydew. Determine 
what pests your plant has and apply the appro­
priate control. (If the plant itself doesn't show 
signs of pest damage, the honeydew may be 
dripping down from an overhanging plant.) On 
small plants, you can wipe the leaves with a 
damp cloth to remove the honeydew and 
the mold.
Leaves with powdery white patches.
Cause; Powdery mildew. The powdery leaf 
patches of this common plant disease consist 
of fungal strands and spores. The fungus feeds 
on plant nutrients, causing leaf yellowing. The 
problem is most common on upper leaf surfaces. 
Fungus from 1 plant can spread through a 
crowded area within days.
Encourage good air circulation by thin­
ning plants. Water from below to keep foliage 
dry. Protect mildew-prone plants, like zinnias, 
by spraying leaves early in the season with an
antitranspirant spray. Pick off infected leaves; 
remove and destroy seriously infected plants. 
Spray remaining plants with sulfur or a com­
mercial fungicidal soap spray.
Leaves greenish yellow; growth poor. 
Cause; Aster yellows. This is a common dis­
ease of many annuals. Leafhoppers carry the 
disease, spreading it through their sap-sucking 
feeding habits. These tiny, green or brown, 
wedge-shaped insects move about by running 
sideways or by hopping. They usually feed on 
the undersides of plant leaves. Affected plants 
branch abnormally. Rowers are deformed or 
absent. Flowers, regardless of original color, 
turn a yellow-green.
There is no cure. Remove and destroy 
infected plants. Control leafhoppers by spray­
ing remaining plants with a mixture of insecti­
cidal soap and 70 percent isopropyl alcohol (1 
tablespoon alcohol to 1 pint soap solution). 
Spray 3 times, once every 3 days. Overwatering 
increases chances of the disease, particularly 
in heavy soils.
Leaves spotted; buds wilted and dark. 
Cause: Plant bugs. Tarnished plant bugs are 
‘A" insects with yellow, black, and red mot­
tling on the wings. Four-lined plant bugs are 
*/«", yellow bugs with 4 black stripes on their 
wings. Both pests attack a wide range of 
ornamentals. Control by handpicking; dust 
with pyrethrin for serious infestations.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. A 
large number of fungi and bacteria cause spots 
on plant leaves, in a variety of colors, shapes, 
and sizes. In some cases, the spots may spread 
to cover entire leaves, stunting plant growth.
Fortunately, the same controls are effec­
tive against many leaf spot diseases. Remove 
and discard infected leaves. Thin plants and 
avoid crowding future plantings. Wash your 
tools and hands after handling infected plants. 
Avoid overhead watering. Inspect bedding 
plants on purchase. Clean up plant debris to 
remove overwintering sites.

20 
■ 
PRC m u * ! SOLVING PI A M  (il II)H
Leaves rolled. Cause: Leaf rollers. These 
*/2" - r . green-bodied, brown-headed caterpil­
lars web leaf edges together and feed on the 
enclosed leaves and buds. If the infestation is 
light, break open the "envelopes" and pick off 
ihe caterpillars; for heavier infestations, spray 
the leaves with BTK.
Whole Plant Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. Several species of pear-shaped, Vfc'-Vs" 
aphids attack annuals. Aphids can be green, 
pink, black, gray, or with a white fluffy coating 
and have long antennae and 2 short tubes 
projecting from the rear of their abdomens. 
These pests clusier under leaves and on grow­
ing lips. Aphids suck plant sap, causing leaf 
and bud distortion and blossom and leaf drop. 
Their feeding may spread diseases such as 
aster yellows. As they feed, they excrete sticky 
honeydew on which sooty mold grows; see 
“Leaves with black coating” on page 19 for 
more information.
Wash aphids from plants by spraying plants 
with water; repeat as needed to control 
infestations. Encourage natural predators and 
parasites. For serious infestations, spray with 
insecticidal soap, or pyrethrin as a last resort.
Seedlings or young plants cut off at soil 
level. Cause: Cutworms. These brown or gray,
1 ”-2" caterpillars feed on plants at night, cut­
ting off transplants and sometimes eating entire 
seedlings. You'll find severed plants lying on 
the ground the next morning. Most active in 
May and June, cutworms can destroy several 
plants each night. These caterpillars remain 
below the soil surface during the day.
Protect plants by placing a collar, such as 
a toilet paper roll or an open-ended can, around 
each young plant. Push the collar into the soil 
so that about half is below the surface. Apply 
parasitic nematodes to the soil.
Leaves and stems with white, cottony 
clusters. Cause: Mealybugs. At first, mealy­
bugs may be hard to see. but as the plant wilts,
and mealybugs rapidly multiply, colonies be­
come quite visible. These minute insects are 
covered with a fluffy white coating. They suck 
plant sap and cause the plant to look unhealthy. 
Mealybugs secrete a sugary substance called 
honeydew, which makes leaves sticky and may 
encourage the growth of sooty mold fungus: 
see “Leaves with black coating” on page 19 
for more information.
Control small infestations by spraying them 
off the plant with water. Insecticidal soap will 
also control mealybugs; be sure to cover the 
plant thoroughly.
Seedlings die. Cause: Damping-off. 
Damping-off is caused by various soil fungi. 
Sometimes seedling stems rot before they even 
appear above the surface; in other cases, seed­
lings are affected after they emerge. The weak, 
blackened stems will collapse, resulting in seed­
ling death.
Damaged seedlings cannot be cured. To 
prevent damping-off, let the soil surface dry 
slightly between waterings. Indoors, run a low- 
speed fan near your seedlings to promote good 
air circulation. Outdoors, thin seedlings to 
avoid overcrowding. Do not add nitrogen fer­
tilizers until seedlings have produced their 
first true leaves.
Antirrhinum
Snapdragon.
Tender perennials grown as annuals.
Most gardeners try snapdragons at least 
once, and many make them a garden mainstay. 
Bloom time is winter and spring in mild winter 
areas, and spring to summer elsewhere. Snap­
dragons prefer cool weather but tolerate heat. 
Single or double upright flower spikes offer a 
variety of color choices, including red. white,

APPl£ ■ 
21
yellow, orange, and pink. Height range is 4 "-48". 
Plants may self-sow.
Start seeds indoors in late summer or 
early fall in mild climates and in early spring 
where frosts are common. Do not cover seeds; 
they require light and warmth for germination. 
Seedlings appear in 7 days. Move seedlings 
outside in spring when the planting bed can 
be worked. Direct-seeding outdoors is possible, 
but seeds dry out rapidly, so frequent sprin­
kling is necessary. Purchased bedding plants 
flower faster than home-grown plants because 
of the controlled growing conditions.
Place plants 6"-12" apart in full sun and 
humus-rich, well-drained, somewhat sandy soil. 
To keep plants from becoming leggy or spindly, 
pinch them back when they are 3"-6" high. 
Pinching may cause a slight flowering setback 
at first, but later, flower production will mark­
edly increase. Give ample water from below. 
Fertilize once a month. Cut flower spikes fre­
quently to maintain bloom. When flowering 
slows down, cut plants back severely and give 
liquid fertilizer. In windy areas, staking may 
be necessary.
Problems
Stems and leaf undersides with dusty, dark 
brown spots. Cause: Rust. This fungus devel­
ops quite rapidly, so leaves must be monitored 
for initial spotting. Rust-resistant snapdrag­
ons are now available and should be used 
whenever possible. However, they don’t elimi­
nate the problem.
Infections are less likely if snapdragons 
are grown rapidly and vigorously. Keeping the 
soil evenly moist will encourage strong, healthy 
growth. If rust spotting appears, or if you have 
had rust problems in prior years, dust every
2 weeks with sulfur, beginning in very early 
spring. Fertilize and water regularly, but avoid 
overhead watering, which helps transfer rust 
spores. Water in mornings. Remove and de­
stroy badly infected plants. In severe situa­
tions, where rust appears in succeeding years
despite controls, change planting locations.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves, stems, and buds distorted” 
on the opposite page for controls.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. For control measures, 
see “Leaves stippled with yellow: foliage 
webbed” on page 18.
Apple
Malus spp. (Rosaceae)
Apples are deciduous trees growing from 
6' to more than 30'. depending on soil, root- 
stock. and cultivar. The showy, pink-tinged 
white blossoms appear in spring mostly on 
spurs—short branches that elongate only a 
fraction of an inch per year. Apples are hardy 
in Zones 3-9.
Culture
Plant in full sun in well-drained, moder­
ately fertile, slightly acidic soil. Train trees to 
a framework of well-spaced, wide-angled 
branches. Prune bearing trees each winter to 
admit light into the tree and encourage good 
air circulation. As you prune, remove diseased 
and spindly wood and crossed branches. Where 
dense growth blocks out light, remove extra 
shoots at their bases. To develop growth on 
spindly shoots, remove the end of the shoot 
just above an outward-facing bud. For more 
pruning information, see “Pruning and Train­
ing” on page 101. For best results, choose 
cultivars resistant to a wide range of diseases. 
These include Jonafree, ‘Liberty’, ‘Nova Easy 
Grow’. ‘Priscilla, ‘Redfree*, and ‘William’s Pride’.
To set fruit, most cultivars need cross- 
pollination by a second compatible apple or 
crab apple planted within 40’-50*. Some 
cultivars, such as ‘Jonagold’ and ‘Mutsu’. pro­

22 
■ 
HR0BI.EM-ij01.VING PLANT (il IDF.
duce nonviable pollen and can't serve as 
pollinators. A few. like ‘Golden Delicious, are 
self-pollinating. If you’re planting 1 tree, improve 
fruit set by grafting a branch of a suitable 
pollinator onto the tree. For more informa­
tion on setting fruit, see "Setting Fruit" on 
page 101.
Fruit Problems
Fruit with holes surrounded by brown, 
crumbly excrement. Cause: Codling moths. 
Adults appear in early spring and lay eggs in 
trees within 2-6 weeks of blossom time. Eggs 
hatch into larvae within 5-14 days. The fat, 
white or pinkish,7A" caterpillars tunnel through 
fruit and may be gone by the time you find the 
holes, which may be filled with what looks 
like moist sawdust. For light infestations, kill 
eggs by spraying superior oil on leaves and 
twigs within 2-6 weeks of blossoming. For 
heavy infestations, kill larvae before they tun­
nel into fruit by spraying the tree canopy with 
pyrethrin at petal fall and again 10-14 days 
later. Mixing pyrethrin spray with a synergist 
(see “The Other Ingredients" on page 469) 
can improve control. For additional details on 
codling moth's life cycle and controls, see 
“Coordinated Control" on page 262.
Codling moths often produce several gen­
erations per growing season. Trapping the pupat­
ing caterpillars aids control. Remove loose 
bark and wrap the trunk with a band of corru­
gated cardboard or burlap. Periodically remove 
the band and destroy pupae. Also inspect har­
vest containers for pupae.
Since codling moths prefer crowded fruit, 
you can discourage attack by thinning apples 
until no fruit touches. Infested apples may 
drop early: pick up and destroy dropped fruit 
before larvae emerge to pupate. If you have a 
single backyard tree and no other trees in 
your area, try trapping male moths with 
pheromones. Mating disruption pheromones 
are also available. Since females rarely fly more 
than 1(X) yards looking for host plants, plant
your trees well away from other apple, pear, 
or walnut host trees in your area.
The effectiveness of other controls 
depends on local conditions. Introduced 
Trichogrammci wasps control this pest in some 
orchards but not in others. Success depends 
on such factors as weather, optimum timing of 
parasite release, and using the correct species 
of wasp. If you’d like to try this technique, be 
sure to purchase a species of Trichogramma 
that parasitizes codling moths. BTK may also 
help with control, but you have to apply it 
during the 3-5 days between the time when 
the eggs hatch and the larvae enter the fruit. 
Once the larvae are in the fruit, BTK is in­
effective. You may find that BTK is more 
effective when combined with a feeding at- 
tractant (also called an appetite stimulant!, 
such as molasses. See the opposite page for an 
illustration of this pest.
In the future, gardeners may be able to 
buy new experimental codling moth control 
products, such as codling moth granulosis virus. 
Another experimental product, encapsulated 
BTK. releases the bacteria through a timed- 
release capsule for potential long-term con­
trol of codling moth larvae. Also, cultivars 
resistant to codling moths may eventually be 
available.
Fruit dimpled; brown tunnels through flesh.
Cause: Apple maggots. These ‘A" larvae of 
the apple maggot fly ruin fruit by copious 
tunneling. Adult flies emerge from soilborne 
pupae in late June and continue to appear 
until early autumn. Flies puncture fruit skin 
and deposit eggs, which hatch into fruit- 
tunneling maggots. Infested apples often drop. 
To prevent buildup of pupae around trees, 
collect and destroy dropped fruit at least weekly.
Apple maggot flies are attracted to fruit 
by sight. You can control them by trapping 
them on dark red balls coated with a sticky 
coating, such as Tangle-Trap. Buy commer­
cially made traps or make your own from 
discarded croquet balls. In mid-June hang 1

APPLE 
■ 
23
APPLE ♦ 
 
and Why 
^
F ruit with
V  
/  Fruit 
- h
brown, velvety 
i 
'o r corky surface lesions.
"  Cause: Apple scab.
Leaves have similar spots. 
J  
lum yellow, and drop; 
/ •
; “^ ru it cracks. 
'* J \ . 1
i  Leaves yellowing;
-death of whole branches. 
tJ j .Cause San Jose scale. Afflicted trees
lose vigor: fruit may be spotted or deformed.
M a g g o t
rotting spots.
B / 1  fcCause Black rot. 
IjS pots dark 
■with black and
#  {■' -.Jflpbrowi i rings;
• 
twigs and 
BFbranches have
sunken, red-brown cankers.
Leaves with pale 
yellow spots that 
enlarge and turn 
/  * 
r  
orange. Cause:
> 
> Cedar-opple rust
it Fruit has yellow 
K *  I spots and
3 F f l  
' J m a v fa H  
- 4
Crawler
Winged
male
Male cover
Female cover 
%” 
Female
Fruit with holes
Leaves w ith a light 
powdery coating.
surrounded by brown, 
s/cru m b ly  excrement. Cause: Codling moths. 
Larvae tunnel through fruit, especially around 
the core.
Cause: Powdery mildew. 
Fruit has surface 
netting or russeting.
La r\a
A d u l t
Adult
V  wingspan
Young fruit with 
crescent-shaped scars.
Cause: Pum  curculios. Scarred fruit 
may drop prematurely; mature fruit 
may be deformed.
A dult
.* .  
F ruit dim pled; brown 
tunnels through flesh.
. 
A  Cause. Apple maggots Larvae 
' 
bore small, threadlik* tunnels
through fruit; fruit often rots.

24 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
trap per dwarf tree or 4-8 traps per full-size 
tree. Hang traps at eye-level, 2-3' in from 
branch tips, near fruit but not completely hid­
den by leaves. Clean traps every few days and 
reapply the sticky coating. See page 23 for an 
illustration of this pest.
Young fruit with crescent-shaped scars. 
Cause: Plum curculios. This beetle, common 
east of the Rocky Mountains, leaves a char­
acteristic crescent-shaped scar as it lays eggs 
in fruit. Damaged apples may drop, but fre­
quently will remain on the tree. Since plum 
curculios cannot mature in hard apple flesh, 
fruit that doesn’t drop will be superficially 
scarred but otherwise edible.
To control this pest without sprays, spread 
a dropcloth beneath the tree and jar the trunk 
and branches with a padded mallet. Collect 
and destroy curculios that fall onto the sheet. 
For best results, jar the tree twice a day, begin­
ning as soon as you see the first scarred fruit. 
In addition, prevent hatching of some curcu- 
lio eggs by picking up and discarding dropped 
fruit. Some apples (‘M utsu\ for example) are 
more resistant to plum curculios than others. 
In the future, breeders may be able to develop 
other apple cultivars with even greater curcu- 
lio resistance. R>r more information, see “Young 
fruit with crescent-shaped scars’’ on page 186. 
See page 23 for an illustration of this pest.
Fruit with brown, velvety or corky surface 
lesions. Cause: Apple scab. This serious, wide­
spread disease begins when spring warmth 
and moisture promote the discharge of fungal 
spores from old, infested apple leaves into the 
air. These spores can infect the leaves and 
fruits of susceptible apples growing nearby. 
To prevent scab from spreading into the tree 
each spring, destroy dropped leaves in the 
fall. Either collect and compost leaves in a hot 
compost pile or hasten their decay on the 
ground by shredding them with a lawn mower. 
You may also till leaves into the soil or spray 
them with a nitrogen source, such as blood 
meal, to speed decomposition.
Growing-season applications of copper, 
sulfur, or lime-sulfur sprays will help control 
scab. If you have susceptible cultivars or if the 
weather is very warm and wet, spray weekly 
beginning with the appearance of the first 
green tips on the tree until disease pressure 
subsides. Pruning to encourage sunlight pene­
tration and air circulation also helps with 
control. Scab-resistant cultivars include ‘Golden 
Delicious, ‘Grimes Golden’, ‘Jonagold’, ‘Jona­
thon’, ‘Mutsu’, ‘Spigold’, and ‘York’.
In the future gardeners may be able to 
treat fallen leaves with a fungus such asAthelia 
bambacina, which inhibits development of over­
wintering apple scab. See page 23 for an illus­
tration of apple scab.
Fruit with rotting spots. Cause: Sum­
mer disease. Summer diseases are fungal dis­
eases associated with hot weather. Dark spots 
with alternating black and brown rings indi­
cate black rot. Other summer diseases include 
bitter rot (slightly sunken, tan spots) and white 
rot (watery decay). Black rot prevails where 
summers are cool; bitter rot and white rot, 
where summers are warm. Summer disease 
fungi overwinter in mummified fruit and in 
cankers on diseased wood. To control, remove 
and dispose of all cankered wood. Collect and 
destroy mummified fruit. Black rot and white 
rot attack weakened or wounded trees, so 
keep them healthy with good pruning and 
nutrition. Prune in early spring, when wounds 
heal most quickly. Sulfur sprays help control 
black rot (see page 23 for an illustration). 
Cultivars resistant to bitter rot include ‘Akane’, 
‘Blairmont’, ‘Fuji’, ‘Hawaii’, ‘Jonafree’, ‘Jona- 
licious’, ‘Liberty’, ‘Melrose’, ‘Priscilla’, and 
‘Spartan’. Cultivars resistant to white rot include 
‘Akane’, ‘Arkansas Black’, ‘Arkansaw’, ‘Dayton’, 
‘Fuji’, ‘Hawaii’, ‘Jonafree’, ‘Jonalicious’, ‘Liberty’, 
‘Limbertwig’, and ‘Melrose’.
Fruit with yellow skin spots that later turn 
orange. Cause: Cedar-apple rust. Infected fruit 
is small, deformed, and may fall prematurely. 
For more information see “Leaves with pale yel­

APPLE 
■ 
25
low spots that enlarge and turn orange" below.
Fruit with surface netting or russeting. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. For more informa­
tion, see “Leaves with a light powdery coat­
ing" below.
Fruit with red skin spots bearing white 
centers. Cause: San Jose scale. For more 
information, see “Leaves yellow: death of whole 
branches" on page 26.
Fruit with raised black spots or brown 
smudges on the surface. Causes: Fly speck; 
sooty blotch. Black spots are fly speck; brown 
smudges are sooty blotch. Both of these blem­
ishes are fungal diseases and both can be con­
trolled with sulfur sprays. But since both are 
superficial, you can just rub them off the fruit.
Leaf and Branch Problems
Leaves with olive-brown, velvety spots that 
become brown and corky. Cause: Apple scab. 
Infected leaves may turn yellow and drop 
prematurely, further weakening the tree. For 
more information see “Fruit with brown, vel­
vety or corky surface lesions" above.
New leaves twisted or curled and covered 
with a sticky coating. Cause: Aphids. You 
may find these tiny green, black, gray, pink, 
or white fluffy-coated insects on leaf under­
sides. The leaves may be covered with a black 
coating, caused by a fungus called sooty mold 
that feeds on the honeydew exuded by aphids. 
Aphids weaken trees by sucking sap, but they 
depart by midsummer. For a light infestation, 
just wait it out. Also grow nectar-producing 
flowers, such as dill and buckwheat, near your 
trees to provide food for aphid predators (par­
asitic wasps, lady beetles, and hover flies). Or 
attract aphid predators by spraying commer­
cial or homemade yeast-and-sugar mixtures 
on your trees. For more information, see “New 
leaves twisted or curled and covered with a 
sticky coating” on page 67.
Leaves with pale yellow spots that enlarge 
and turn orange. Cause: Cedar-apple rust. 
Leaves infected with cedar-apple rust may drop
prematurely. This fungal disease overwinters 
as a gall on various juniper species—commonly 
on Eastern red cedar [Juniperus virginiana). 
In the spring the galls swell, push out orange 
horns, and discharge disease spores that are 
borne on the wind to infect apple trees. The 
leaf spots caused by cedar-apple rust won't 
spread disease into the tree, and you can’t 
make them go away once they appear.
Cedar-apple rust isn't a problem in areas 
with few Eastern red cedars or other junipers 
(.Juniperus spp.). Removing nearby Eastern 
red cedars won't prevent the arrival of wind- 
borne disease coming from trees miles away. 
Sulfur sprays are only fairly effective. Resistant 
cultivars include ‘Arkansas Black’, ‘Empire’, 
‘Gaia’, ‘Granny Smith’, ‘G rave nste in', ‘Grimes 
Golden’, ‘Jerseymac', ‘McIntosh’, ‘Macoun’, 
‘Tydeman's Red’, and ‘Winesap’. See page 23 
for an illustration of this disease.
Leaves with a light powdery coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. As this fungal dis­
ease becomes more severe, leaves may curl 
lengthwise and drop. Since it overwinters in 
dormant buds, winter pruning of infected buds, 
which show white fungal growths, aids control. 
Spray sulfur for growing-season control. 
Resistant cultivars include ‘Empire’, ‘Golden 
Delicious’, ‘McIntosh’, ‘Mutsu’, ‘Red Delicious', 
‘Rhode Island Greening', and ‘Spigold’. See 
page 23 for an illustration of this disease.
Leaves suddenly blacken, with tips of grow­
ing shoots bent over. Cause: Fire blight. Don’t 
confuse this disease with sooty mold, a black 
fungus that rubs off easily. Fire blight bacteria 
may travel to roots and kill the entire tree. For 
growing-season control, remove blighted parts 
at least 6" below the infected area. Between 
cuts, dip tools into isopropyl alcohol or 10 
percent bleach solution (1 part bleach to 9 
parts water). Resistant cultivars include ‘Arkan­
sas Black’, ‘Baldwin’, ‘Ben Davis', ‘Empire', 
and ‘Winesap'. For more information, see 
“Leaves suddenly blacken, with tips of grow­
ing shoots bent over" on page 170.

26 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Whole Plant Problems
Leaves yellow; death of whole branches.
Cause: San Jose scale. Clusters of these suck­
ing insects cling to bark and appear as small 
gray bumps that can be easily scraped off with 
a fingernail. Control with late winter applica­
tion of dormant oil spray. See page 23 for an 
illustration of this pest.
Fruit disappears; bark gnawed. Causes: 
Deer: rabbits; mice. For information on con­
trolling these pests, see "Stopping Animal Pests” 
on page 408.
Tree declines; sawdustlike material on 
trunk near ground level. Cause: Roundheaded 
appletree borers. These creamy white, dark- 
headed larvae bore into trunks near ground 
level, girdling the tree or tunneling into the 
heartwood. Kill borers by inserting a thin, 
flexible wire or by injecting parasitic nema­
todes into the hole.
Apricot
Prunus armeniaca ( Rosaceae)
Apricots are deciduous trees growing 
20-30'. The pink blossoms appear in spring 
on spurs—short branches that elongate only a 
fraction of an inch per year— 1 year old and 
older. Apricots are hardy in Zones 4-9.
Plant in a sunny site with well-drained, 
moderately fertile soil and protected from late 
frost. Train young trees to a modified central 
leader; for complete instructions, see the illus­
tration on page 102. Most apricots are self- 
pollinating, but some cultivars bear more if 
cross-pollinated. For more information, see 
“Setting Fruit” on page 101. Apricots and 
peaches belong to the same genus and have 
similar problems. For more information on
problems and solutions, see the Peach entry 
beginning on page 164.
Problems
Young fruit with crescent-shaped scars.
Cause: Plum curculios. These beetles, com­
mon east of the Rockies, leave characteristic 
scars as they lay eggs in fruit. Damaged fruit 
usually drops. For information on controls, 
see “Young fruit with crescent-shaped scars" 
on page 186.
Fruit with small brown spots that enlarge 
and grow fuzzy in humid weather. Cause: 
Brown rot. Blossoms attacked by this fungal 
disease also may wither, fruit may mummify 
(dry and shrivel) on the tree, and leaves may 
turn brown. Resistant cultivars include ‘Harcot*, 
‘Hargrand’, and ‘Harlayne’. For more informa­
tion, see “Fruit with small brown spots that 
enlarge and grow fuzzy in humid weather” on 
page 166.
Fruit with small, dark, sunken spots or 
cracks on skin. Cause: Bacterial leaf spot. 
This disease, common in the Southeast, is 
very difficult to control. Plant resistant cultivars, 
including ‘Alfred*, ‘Curtis. ‘Harcot’, ‘Hargrand’, 
and ‘Harlayne*. For more information, see 
“Fruit with small, dark, sunken spots or cracks 
on skin” on page 166.
Fruit with pinkish worms. Cause: Ori­
ental fruit moth larvae. For more information 
on this pest, which also tunnels into growing 
shoots, see “Growing shoots wilted or dying” 
on page 166.
Growing shoots wilted or dying. Causes: 
Oriental fruit moth larvae; peach twig borers. 
Both pests tunnel into growing shoots and 
cause wilting. R>r more information, see “Grow­
ing shoots wilted or dying" on page 166.
Leaves with small purple spots, some spots 
with centers missing. Cause: Shothole disease. 
Centers of leaf spots often enlarge to about 
’A", then fall out. This fungal disease, com­
mon in the West, spreads rapidly on wet foliage.

ARABIS ■ 
27
For more information, see “Leaves with small 
purple spots, some spots with centers miss­
ing” on page 167.
Tree declines; gummy exudate mixed with 
sawdustlike material on trunk near ground level. 
Cause: Peachtree borers. Inspect the trunk 
near or just below the ground; you may find 
holes and a gummy exudate made by peachtree 
borers, which are the larvae of a clear-winged 
moth that bore the inner bark. For informa­
tion on controls, see “Tree declines; gummy 
exudate mixed with sawdustlike material on 
trunk near ground" on page 168.
Branches wilting and dying, fail to leaf out 
in spring. Causes: Bacterial canker: Valsa 
canker. Both diseases may cause amber gum 
to exude from the bark. The cultivars ‘Harcot’, 
‘Hargrand1, ‘Harlayne’, and ‘Harogem’ are 
resistant to Valsa. For more information, see 
“Branches wilting and dying, fail to leaf out in 
spring” on page 167.
Aquilegia
Columbine. Perennials.
Columbines brighten spring and summer 
with blossoms of yellow, white, purple, red, or 
bicolor. Plants reach 1-3' and bear l"-4", 
sp u rred  flow ers.
Plant these woodland natives in moist, 
organic, well-drained, slightly acid soil. Overly 
rich soil causes weak, short-lived plants, lush 
growth, and few flowers. Plants tolerate full 
sun if temperatures stay below 80°F but pre­
fer light shade. Set plants 1' apart in spring 
after the last frost or in fall when plants are 
dormant, placing crowns at soil level. Colum­
bines have long roots; only young plants trans­
plant easily. To start from seed, sow outdoors
in early summer or indoors in winter. Don’t 
cover the seed; it needs light to germinate. 
Columbines self-seed, but seedlings may not 
match the parents. Mulch lightly in cold win­
ter areas.
Problems
Leaves with tan or brown blotches or ser­
pentine tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. These 
tiny pale green fly larvae feed between the 
upper and lower leaf surfaces. Prune off and 
destroy infested leaves. Remove debris in fall 
to destroy overwintering leafminers. Let para­
sitic wasps control these pests, or apply weekly 
insecticidal soap sprays starting when the first 
tunnel appears.
Stems blacken at base; leaves yellow; plant 
topples over. Cause: Fungal and/or bacterial 
rots. Prevent with cultural practices: Plant 
only in well-drained sites: avoid crown or root 
injuries from careless digging. Keep winter 
mulch away from crowns to prevent rotting 
during dormancy. Remove affected plants and 
surrounding soil; don’t compost them.
Arabis
Rock cress. Perennials.
These low-growing, spreading plants are 
often used as groundcovers, in rock gardens, 
and as border edging; few species grow over 1' 
tall. Rock cresses prefer soil on the dry side, 
cool temperatures, and full sun. White, pink, 
or rose flowers appear in early spring.
Summer heat can cause rock cresses to 
die out in the center, a condition best pre­
vented with good growing conditions. Divide 
mature plants in spring in most areas. Space 
plants 5" apart. Cut back after flowering to

28 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
encourage dense growth. Apply a winter mulch 
in cold areas. If thrips, mites, or aphids cause 
leaf yellowing, knock them from plants with a 
strong water spray. Time watering so plants 
have dried by nightfall; wait until soil is fairly 
dry before respraying. Overwatering encour­
ages rot, as does poor drainage.
Artemisia
Artemisia, wormwood. Perennials.
This genus includes southernwood (Arte­
misia abrotanum), wormwood {A. absinthium), 
and tarragon (A. dracunculus). Durable and 
sometimes woody, most species are grown for 
their feathery, gray-green to silver foliage. Plants 
given full sun and average, well-drained soil 
suffer few problems. Rich soil promotes rangy 
growth; excess moisture encourages root rot. 
Mounding types such as silvermound artemi- 
sia [A. schmidtiana), often react to high tem­
peratures by dying out in the center; cut stems 
back to about 1" tall to encourage overall 
new growth. Artemisias aromatic oils repel 
most insects.
Asparagus
Asparagus officinalis(Liliaceae)
Asparagus is a long-lived perennial. Its 
tender young shoots are one of the first vege­
tables ready to harvest in the spring.
Culture
Asparagus is hardy in Zones 2-9. It thrives 
in any area with winter ground freezes or a 
dry season to provide a dormant period each 
year. Asparagus does best in full sun and deep, 
well-drained soil. Select a permanent location 
carefully, since plants will produce for 20 years 
or more. Dig out all weeds and add plenty 
of compost to the soil before planting. As­
paragus requires high levels of phosphorus, 
potassium, and nitrogen. Do a soil test and 
add amendments as necessary. If your soil is 
heavy or poorly drained, plant asparagus in 
raised beds.
Plant 1-year-old crowns from a reputable 
nursery that sells fresh, firm, disease-free roots, 
or start your plants from seed. Soak seeds or 
crowns in compost tea for 5 minutes before 
planting to reduce disease problems.
Most seed-grown asparagus plants even­
tually out-produce those started from crowns. 
Growing from seed also allows you to elimi­
nate female plants. A bed of all male plants 
can produce as much as 30 percent more 
spears than a mixed bed of male and female 
plants. Plants grown from seed will flower 
their first summer. When the tiny flowers appear, 
observe them with a magnifying glass. Female 
flowers have well-developed, 3-lobed pistils; 
male blossoms are larger and longer than female 
flowers. Weed out all female plants. The fol­
lowing spring, transplant the males to the per­
manent bed.
Harvesting new plantings too soon can 
stress plants and make them more susceptible 
to pest problems. Harvest for 2 weeks the 
second season, 4 weeks the third season, and 
up to 8 weeks thereafter.
Mulch with a high-nitrogen compost each 
spring before spears emerge, and again in fall. 
Leave winter-killed foliage, along with straw 
or other light mulch, on the bed to provide 
winter protection. Remove and destroy the

ASPARAGUS ■ 
29
foliage before new growth appears in the spring; 
it can harbor diseases and pest eggs. Over the 
years, the crowns will push closer to the soil 
surface, resulting in smaller and less-tender 
spears. To remedy this, mound 6" of soil over 
the rows each spring.
Spear Problems
Spears small. Causes: Young plants; low 
soil fertility; overharvested plants. Harvest 
lightly the first few years so plants can grow 
strong roots. Reduce harvest if established 
plantings begin to lose vigor. Asparagus is a 
heavy feeder; add lots of compost to maintain 
high soil fertility.
Spears small with brown streaks or gir­
dled at soil line. Cause: Asparagus miners. 
Larvae are W
 long, white maggots. Adults 
are small black flies. Destroy infested spears 
to control.
Spears turn brown, may get soft or wither 
and dry. Cause: Cold injury'. Cut and discard 
damaged spears. Cover spears with mulch or 
newspaper when freezing nights are predicted.
Spears small, with large lesions at or below 
soil line. Cause: Fusarium wilt. Leaves and 
stems yellow, plants wilt, seedlings die. There 
is no cure: remove and destroy infected plants. 
To avoid problems, don't put new plantings 
where asparagus or other Fusarium-susceptible 
plants have grown in 8 years. Plant disease- 
free seed and crowns or resistant cultivars 
such as ‘Greenwich*. ‘Jersey Giant’. ‘Martha 
Washington, and ‘Viking KB3\ Disinfect seed 
before planting. Soak it for 2 minutes in a 10 
percent bleach solution (1 part bleach to 9 
parts water), and rinse for 1 minute under 
running water.
There are reports that adding rock salt to 
asparagus soil at 2 pounds per 100 square feet 
may suppress Fusarium infection and improve 
asparagus root growth.
Spears turn brown near soil line. Cause: 
Crown rot. Remove and destroy diseased plants, 
including roots. Prevent crown rot by planting 
in raised beds and maintaining good drainage. 
Keep soil pH above 6.0. Wait 2 years before 
harvesting new plantings. Some research sug­
gests that not harvesting the first spear of the 
spring on each plant may help prevent crown 
rot because the developing frond produces 
food for the plant.
Spears crooked and deformed, may be 
brown, or scarred; leaves chewed or missing. 
Causes: Asparagus beetles: asparagus fern 
caterpillars: cucumber beetles: mechanical 
injury. Asparagus beetles are blue-black, V<" 
long insects with cream-colored spots and red 
borders on wing covers. Larvae are “A" long, 
humpbacked, gray grubs with black heads. 
They are most active in cool weather. Spotted 
asparagus beetles are reddish orange with 12 
black spots on wing covers. Larvae are orange. 
Fertilize plants to encourage new leaf growth. 
Apply a commercial pyrethrin spray or dust 
to control beetles. Destroy tops in late winter 
to remove overwintering beetles and future 
problems.
Asparagus fern caterpillar I also known as 
the beet army worm I feeds on leaves. It is a 
dull green. P/2" long caterpillar with a light- 
colored stripe along each side of the body. 
Handpick or spray with BTK to control.
Cucumber beetles also eat asparagus 
leaves. For description and controls, see “Leaves 
with chewed holes” on page 215.
Deep cultivation can damage developing 
spears. Cultivate shallowly or use mulch instead. 
In windy areas, blowing sand can scar spears: 
protect plantings with windbreaks.
Spears chewed at soil line. Cause: 
Cutworms. Check for cutworms at night with 
a flashlight. Control with BTK or parasitic 
nematodes. See ‘‘Seedlings clipped off at soil 
line” on page 246 for more controls.

30 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Spear bracts open prematurely (feathering).
Cause: Excessive heat. Harvest spears daily 
when they are about 8" high, especially when 
temperatures are above 95°E
Leaf Problems
Leaves yellow; growth slow. Causes: 
Nitrogen deficiency: waterlogged soil. Spray 
foliage with fish-meal tea and side-dress with 
compost to correct nitrogen deficiency. Wa­
terlogged soil will produce the same symp­
toms. Make sure soil is well-drained or plant 
in raised beds.
Leaves yellow; plant dwarfed or rosetted. 
Cause: Asparagus aphids. These soft-bodied, 
pale green, powdery-looking insects suck plant 
juices and cause plants to weaken. Knock 
aphids off plants with a strong blast of water, 
or spray with insecticidal soap. If that fails to 
control the problem, apply a commercial pyre­
thrin spray or dust.
Leaves turn brown and drop; stems and 
branches have small reddish blisters. Cause: 
Rust. Clean up and dispose of tops in late 
winter to eliminate overwintering spores. Rust 
weakens plants by reducing the leaf area and 
the amount of food stored in the roots. Repeated 
attacks can kill plants. Plant resistant culti­
vars such as 'California 500', ‘Jersey Giant', 
‘M artha Washington*, ‘Mary W ashington, 
Rutgers Beacon, ‘Viking KB3\ and ‘Waltham 
Washington*.
Leaves dull gray-green to brown. Cause: 
Thrips. Adults are tiny, pale, rapidly moving, 
winged insects. The larvae are smaller, wing­
less versions barely visible with the naked eye. 
Trap thrips with sticky traps or spray with 
insecticidal soap. Research indicates that blue 
and yellow sticky traps are the most effective 
thrips catchers in greenhouses. Other studies 
suggest that thrips are most attracted to white 
sticky traps outdoors. Hang traps slightly higher 
than the tops of the plants.
Aster
Aster, Michaelmas daisy. Perennials.
Daisylike aster flowers of purple, pink, or 
white appear in late summer and fall on plants 
that range from 9" to 6' in height.
Asters require ample water—about 1" per 
week —but also need well-drained soil and a 
sunny location. Plants will self-sow with aban­
don if fading flowers are not removed: seed­
lings aren't usually true to parent type. Grow 
tall cultivars out of wind and stake as needed. 
Divide in spring every 2-3 years.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. For 
controls, see “Leaves, stem s, and buds distorted, 
sticky; clusters of small insects" on page 177.
Leaves and/or flowers with holes. Cause: 
Japanese beetles. See “Leaves and/or flowers 
with holes" on page 176 for controls.
Leaves covered with white powder. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. For controls, see “Leaves 
covered with white powder" on page 177.
Leaves and flowers deformed, yellowish; 
small, tarlike spots on undersides. Cause: Lace 
bugs. These small pests with lacy wings cause 
yellow-brown leaf spots. Dark brown drop­
pings on lower leaf surfaces confirm their 
activity. Remove debris in spring and fall to 
deter overwintering. For severe problems, spray 
superior oil. insecticidal soap, or pyrethrin.
Leaves with pale areas on upper surfaces; 
“downy” patches underneath. Cause: Downy 
mildew. This fungus spreads quickly during 
cool, wet nights and warm, humid days, caus­
ing leaves to wilt and die. Remove and destroy 
infected plant parts, encourage air circulation, 
and water early in the day to allow plants to 
dry before nightfall.

AVOCADO 
■ 
31
Astilbe
Astilbe, false spirea. Perennials.
Astilbes’ dark green to bronze, fernlike 
foliage appears in spring, followed by pink, 
white, purple, or red plumelike flower spikes. 
These mid-border plants grow 1 -3' tall with a 
similar spread.
Astilbes enjoy the soggy soil conditions 
shunned by most other perennials, although 
good drainage is needed if winters are wet. 
Use a 3" layer of mulch around plants to con­
serve water. Never let soil dry completely— 
this causes brown-edged leaves and poor growth. 
Set plants 1' apart in partial shade and rich 
soil. Astilbes benefit from spring fertilization 
and light feedings during the growing season. 
Divide every 3-5 years.
Grown under the conditions described 
above, astilbes suffer few pest or disease prob­
lems beyond those common to herbaceous 
perennials.
Problems
Leaves and/or flowers with holes. Cause: 
Japanese beetles. See “Leaves and/or flowers 
with holes" on page 176 for controls.
Leaves covered with white powder. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. Crowding under moist con­
ditions invites powdery mildew. For control 
information, see “Leaves covered with white 
powder" on page 177.
Plant wilts while soil is moist. Cause: 
Fusarium wilt. Fusarium spp. fungi sometimes 
infect astilbes, causing wilting unrelated to 
adequate soil moisture. Young plants wilt 
quickly, while older ones turn pale green and 
lower leaves wilt. Stems show brown streaks 
that darken gradually: grayish pink mold may 
appear. Remove and destroy infected plants
and surrounding soil: do not compost dis­
eased materials. Don’t plant susceptible crops 
in sites where wilt has appeared. Sterilize tools 
after use around infected plants.
Avocado
Persea americana ( Lauraceae)
Avocado trees grow to about 60' and have 
long, drooping leaves. Though evergreen, some 
trees shed their leaves just before a growth 
flush. Each tree bears many thousands of 
flowers, but pollination of only a small per­
centage of flowers ensures a full crop. Avoca­
dos are mostly self-pollinating. They are hardy 
to Zone 10.
Avocados need full sunlight and well- 
drained soil. Pruning is only necessary to keep 
a tree within bounds and to remove diseased 
wood.
Problems
Fruit with brown or purplish, scablike 
lesions. Cause: Fruit scab. Scab is a superfi­
cial skin fungus and not otherwise harmful to 
the plant. No treatment is necessary unless 
infection is so severe that fruit is deformed. 
For severe infection, apply copper sprays in 
early May and twice more at 4-5 week intervals.
Fruit gnawed or eaten. C auses: Birds; 
squirrels: rats; other small animals. Use traps 
or physical barriers to get rid of rodents; net­
ting may be necessary for birds. See “Stopping 
Animal Pests" on page 408 for more informa­
tion on controlling pests.
Leaves skeletonized and webbed together. 
Causes: Avocado caterpillars; omnivorous 
leafroller caterpillars. The yellowish green avo­
cado caterpillar (also called an amorbia) is

32 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
the larva of a reddish brown moth. Omnivo­
rous leafrollers, yellowish green caterpillars 
with a stripe down their backs, are the larvae 
of dark brown moths. Natural enemies, such 
as Trichogramma wasps, often keep these pests 
sufficiently in check. For heavy infestations, 
spray BTK. Also look for and crush caterpil­
lars and masses of eggs.
Leaves wih and yellow on an entire branch. 
Cause: Verticillium wilt. A soilborne fungus 
causes this disease, and there is no way to save 
a tree once it has this problem. Don't plant 
avocados in soil that has sustained other 
Verticillium-susceptible crops such as toma­
toes, peppers, and eggplants. If you suspect 
Verticillium fungi may be in your soil, solarize
it for 1-2 months over the summer before 
planting Verticillium-susceptible plants.
Leaves pale green to yellow and dropping. 
Cause: San Jose scale. Look for the small, 
ash-colored to sooty black bumps of San Jose 
scale clinging to the bark. Colonies of these 
suckirtg, immobile insects cling to bark and 
weaken trees by sucking sap. Control scale 
with dormant oil spray applied in late winter.
Tree declines; stunted pale leaves; no new 
growth. Cause: Root rot. Root rot can be 
caused by overwatering or by poorly drained 
soil, but the disease may take years to develop. 
There is no cure. Replant in well-drained soil 
or on a raised mound of soil. ‘Grande’ and 
‘Martin’ are rootstocks resistant to this problem.
Basil
Ocimum basilicum (Labiatae)
Basil is an annual herb grown for its aro­
matic leaves. To grow healthy, trouble-free 
plants, sow seed indoors in 70°F soil mix, or 
outdoors after the soil has warmed. Basil does 
best in rich, moist, well-drained soil with a pH 
between 5.0 and 8.0, and needs at least 4
hours of full sun per day for good growth.
Basil is rarely troubled by pests or diseases. 
Protect plants with row covers when tempera­
tures drop below 40° E or dark spots caused 
by cold injury may appear on leaves. Fungi 
may also cause dark spots on foliage. Remove 
spotted leaves and spray foliage with compost 
tea or sulfur if problem is severe. If leaves are 
mottled yellow with turned-down edges, plants 
may have cucumber mosaic virus. Destroy 
infected plants. See the Herbs entry begin­
ning on page 116 for other problems.
Copyrighted materi.

BEAN 
■ 
33
Bean
Phaseolus spp. (Leguminosae)
Beans are annual vegetables grown for 
their immature pods, immature seeds, and 
nutritious dry seeds. They are legumes and, 
with the help of certain soil-dwelling bacteria, 
can transform nitrogen from the air into nitro­
gen compounds that plants can absorb. A 
wide range of bean types and cultivars are 
available.
Culture
Beans thrive in most soil. Work in plenty 
of low-nitrogen compost before planting to 
loosen the soil. For a healthy, trouble-free 
crop, plant beans after soil has warmed. Opti­
mum soil temperature for germination is 80°F 
At soil temperatures below 60°F, most bean 
cultivars germinate poorly and are more sus­
ceptible to pests and root rot. Choose light, 
well-drained soil for early plantings, if possible, 
and cover beans with row cover or clear plas­
tic until they emerge. If you use clear plastic, 
be sure to remove it as soon as the seeds 
germinate to avoid ‘‘cooking” the seedlings.
Beans do best when soil pH is between 
5.5 and 6.8. They don't require high soil fertility. 
In fact, high nitrogen levels will delay maturity. 
Spray young plants with seaweed extract to 
prevent micronutrient deficiencies and improve 
overall plant health.
Soak seed in compost tea for 25 minutes 
before planting to help prevent disease and 
speed germination. Treat seed with an inocu- 
lant labeled for the type of bean you are plant­
ing before sowing to promote nitrogen fixation. 
Be sure to buy fresh inoculant each year, or 
check the date on the package for viability.
Don’t touch plants when foliage is wet to 
avoid spreading diseases. Compost plants after 
harvest. Prevent problems by not planting
beans in the same location more often than 
every 3 years.
Whole Plant Problems
Seedlings die or fail to emerge; plant 
stunted. Causes: Seedcorn maggots: root rot. 
Look for ‘A" long, yellow-white maggots feed­
ing on seeds and seedlings. Adults are small 
flies. Seedlings that do come up are deformed 
and spindly. Control these soil-dwelling pests 
by applying parasitic nematodes to the soil 
before replanting.
Root rot causes reddish black streaks on 
the roots: plants are stunted and yellow. Cool, 
wet soil encourages this fungal disease. Destroy 
wilted plants. Replant with fresh seed in well- 
drained, warm soil. Soak seed in compost tea 
before planting.
Plant yellow and stunted, wilts during hot 
days and recovers at night. Causes: Wire- 
worms: bean leaf beetle larvae; root knot nema­
todes. If you suspect any of these pests, pull 
up a plant and examine the roots. Wireworm 
larvae are up to 1 lh ’\  yellow to reddish brown, 
slender, tough-bodied, segmented grubs. Adults 
are xh" long, dark-colored, elongated click 
beetles. Apply parasitic nematodes to the soil 
to control.
Slender white grubs up to Vi" long feed­
ing on roots are bean leaf beetle larvae. See 
“Leaves with large holes’’ on page 36 for more 
information.
Root knot nematodes cause swollen and 
darkened enlargem ents of roots. Destroy 
infested plants. Control root knot nematodes 
by applying chitin or parasitic nematodes to 
the soil. Small, round, pinkish nodules attached 
to the roots are caused by nitrogen-fixing bac­
teria and are beneficial.
Leaf Problems
Leaves with yellow, curling margins.
Causes: Potato leafhoppers; calcium deficien­
cy; salt injury. Look for leafhoppers on plants. 
Adults are Vio", yellow-green, winged insects.

34 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT Gl IDE
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
Leaves with 
num erous small,
; round, reddish 
brown blisters 
' o n  undersides. 
TlCause: Rust. 
Spots appear 
on pods and 
stems as well.
Leaves with 
w hite grow th or 
water-soaked spots.
Cause: Downy mildew.
Attacks lima beans only, also
causing pods with 
white spots.
Leaves with 
w hite growth or 
water-soaked spots.
Cause: Bacterial blight. 
Pods with water soakec^ \ 
or brown patches: jajgL P  
seeds yellow, 
blotched.
Leaves mottled 
with golden yellow 
and crinkled or curled.
Cause: Bean mosaic. 
Pods rough, mottled, 
and deformed
Leaves with dark streaks; 
black petioles and veins on 
undersides of leaves.
Cause: Anthracnose. Pods have 
round, sunken spots.
Adult
Larva
Adult
Leaves skeletonized.
Cause: Mexican bean beetles. 
Larvae and adults eat lower
- surfaces of leaves; also chew 
pods and stems.
Leaves 
with yellow, 
curling margins.
Cause: Calcium deficiency. 
Plants stunted; shoot tips 
turn black and die.
Large holes in leaves. Cause: Bean leaf beetles. 
Adults feed above ground; larvae eat roots; 
plants may turn yellow and wilt.

Nymphs are smaller and wingless. Severe infes­
tations cause plants to wilt and flowers and 
pods to drop. Leafhoppers can spread viruses 
from plant to plant, so control is important. 
Cover emerging seedlings with row cover if 
leafhoppers have been a problem. Spray plants 
with insecticidal soap in the evening to control. 
If that is not effective, spray or dust with 
pyrethrin. Controls are most effective on wing­
less nymphs since adults fly away when 
disturbed. Be sure to spray the undersides of 
leaves where nymphs congregate.
Salt injury is common in areas of the 
country with saline soils, because beans are 
very sensitive to sodium. Planting in raised 
beds (with lots of compost worked in) and 
watering thoroughly may help.
If plants are also stunted and shoot tips 
turn black and die, suspect calcium deficiency. 
Sec the opposite page for an illustration of this 
problem. Keep soil evenly moist to help prevent 
problems. If soil test shows deficiency, add gyp­
sum. or calcitic lime if pH is below 6.2.
New growth distorted and yellow. Cause: 
Tarnished plant bugs. Adults are oval, light 
green to brown. '/»" long bugs. Nymphs are 
smaller and yellow-green. Trap them with white 
sticky traps, or spray with pyrethrin in the 
evening to control.
Leaves yellow; growth stunted. Cause: 
Nitrogen deficiency. This problem is often 
brought on by waterlogged soil. Spray foliage 
and drench roots with fish emulsion or fish­
meal tea to alleviate symptoms. Prevent prob­
lems by adding compost to the soil and providing 
good drainage.
Leaves yellow and withered. Cause: Bean 
aphids. Adults are small, black, soft-bodied, 
sucking insects. For mild infestations, knock 
pests off plants with a blast of water. Spray 
plants with insecticidal soap if aphid popula­
tions are low, or with a commercial neem or 
pyrethrin solution if more than half the shoot 
tips have aphids.
Leaves mottled with golden yellow and 
crinkled or curled. Cause: Bean mosaic. Leaves 
of infected plants curl downward, and plants 
are stunted. Seeds are small and shriveled. 
See the opposite page for an illustration of 
this disease. Remove and destroy plants in­
fected with this viral disease. Prevent problems 
by controlling aphids that spread the disease 
and by planting tolerant cultivars, such as ‘E-Z 
Pick', ‘Goldcrop’, Lake Largo’, ‘Morgane*. 
‘Provider’, ‘Roma 2’, ‘Sungold*, ‘Tendercrop’, 
‘Topcrop’. and ‘Venture’.
Leaves puckered and curled downward; 
plant dwarfed. Cause: Curly top virus. Re­
move and destroy infected plants. Prevent 
problems by controlling aphids that spread 
the disease and by planting resistant or toler­
ant cultivars such as ‘G oldcrop’, ‘G reat 
Northern’, and ‘Hystyle’.
Leaves with white growth or water-soaked 
spots. Causes: Downy mildew; powdery mil­
dew: white mold: bacterial blight. Warm, damp 
weather encourages these diseases, the first 3 
of which are caused by fungi. Downy mildew 
only attacks lima beans, causing young shoots 
and flowers of infected plants to develop white 
growth: leaf veins arc twisted and purplish. 
See the opposite page for an illustration of 
downy mildew. Powdery mildew and white 
mold can attack all types of beans. Leaves 
develop a powdery or fuzzy white coating.
To control fungal diseases, thin plants to 
increase air movement. If weather is wet. spray 
sulfur in the evening. Plant cultivars. such as 
‘Provider’ and ‘Tendercrop’, that tolerate all 3 
diseases. Under some conditions, a baking- 
soda-and-soap spray (1 teaspoon baking soda. 
1 teaspoon liquid dish soap. 1 quart water) 
may prevent further infection.
Water-soaked spots caused by bacterial 
blight turn brown with a yellow halo and then 
become dry and brittle. See the opposite page 
for an illustration of this disease. Spray plants 
with copper to reduce the spread of the dis­

36 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
ease if plants are setting fruit. If no new pods 
are forming, don't bother to spray; remove 
and destroy infected plants.
Leaves with dark streaks; black petioles 
and veins on undersides of leaves. Cause: 
Anthracnose. Spots exude salmon-colored ooze 
in cool, moist weather. See page 34 for an illus­
tration of this fungal disease. This disease 
thrives in wet. humid conditions. Spray plants 
with sulfur to control. Prevent problems by 
planting tolerant cultivars such as *Espada\ 
‘Marbel*, ‘M organe, and Rocdor*.
Leaves with numerous small, round, red­
dish brown blisters on undersides. Cause: Rust. 
As this fungal disease progresses, leaves turn 
yellow and drop. Spots also appear on pods 
and stems. See page 34 for an illustration of this 
disease. Rust usually develops in late summer. 
To control, spray sulfur as soon as you see 
indications of the disease. Plant cultivars that 
are rust-tolerant, such as 'Burpee Stringless, 
‘Kentucky W onder’, ‘Roma*, 'Spurt*, and 
‘Sungold’, to prevent problems.
Leaves pale and stippled or bronzed. 
Cause: Mites. Hot. dry weather encourages 
outbreaks. Look for these tiny, spiderlike crea­
tures on the undersides of leaves where they 
appear as pale or dark specks. There may be a 
fine webbing on the undersides of leaves. To 
control, spray plants with water or insectici­
dal soap in the evening.
Leaves with wandering, white or translu­
cent tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. Adults are 
tiny black-and-yellow insects. Larvae are pale 
green and maggotlike and tunnel into leaves. 
Remove and destroy mined leaves. Apply row 
cover as soon as plants emerge to prevent 
problems. Use yellow sticky traps to catch 
adults. Certain parasitic nematodes can 
actually attack leafminer larvae inside leaf 
tunnels.
Leaves riddled with tiny holes. Cause: 
Rea beetles. These small, shiny, black beetles
hop when disturbed. Treat plants with a com­
mercial pyrethrin spray or dust if damage is 
severe. Prevent problems by covering young 
plants with row cover.
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Mexican 
bean beetles. See page 34 for an illustration of 
this pest. In severe infestations pods also are 
chewed. Adults are oval, '/»" long, yellowish 
brown beetles with 16 black spots on the wing 
covers. Nymphs are yellowish orange and 
spined. Eggs are yellow and found in groups 
on the undersides of leaves. A tiny parasitic 
wasp, Pediobius foveolatus, provides effective 
control. Release the wasps when there are 
bean beetle larvae present. In cold climates 
you must release the wasps each year as they 
cannot overwinter. Spined soldier bugs are 
also efficient predators. Spray or dust with 
pyrethrin as a last resort.
Leaves with large holes. Causes: Bean 
leaf beetles: cucum ber beetles; various 
caterpillars. Bean leaf beetles a re ‘A” long and 
dark yellow with 6 black dots. The larvae are 
white, up to '/>" long, and feed on roots and 
underground stems. Cucumber beetles are 'A" 
long and greenish yellow with black stripes or 
spots. Prevent problems by covering plants 
with row cover. If beetle damage is severe, 
treat leaves with a commercial neem or pyre­
thrin spray. See page 34 for an illustration of 
bean leaf beetle; see page 214 for an illustra­
tion of cucumber beetle.
Many caterpillars also feed on bean leaves. 
Spray plants with BTK to control.
Flower and Pod Problems
Blossoms appear but no pods form.
Causes: Excessive heat: mechanical injury: 
zinc deficiency. Hot days (85°F or more) or 
mechanical damage caused by heavy rains or 
strong water sprays can cause flowers to drop. 
Wait for new blossoms.

BEET ■ 
37
Zinc deficiency can also cause pods to 
drop. Spray plants with seaweed extract to 
prevent deficiency problems.
Pods with dark, round, sunken spots with 
lighter centers. Cause: Anthracnose. Salmon 
pink ooze appears in wet weather. See "Leaves 
with dark streaks: black petioles and veins on 
undersides of leaves" above for controls.
Pods with water-soaked or brown patches; 
seeds yellow and blotched. Cause: Bacterial 
blight. See "Leaves with white growth or water- 
soaked spots" on page 35 for controls.
Pods with white spots. Causes: Powdery 
mildew: white mold: downy mildew. See “Leaves 
with white growth or water-soaked spots" on 
page 35 for more information and controls. 
Lima bean pods infected with downy mildew 
shrivel and turn black.
Pods rough, mottled, and deformed. 
Cause: Bean mosaic. See "Leaves mottled with 
golden yellow and crinkled or curled" on page 
35 for controls.
Pods with wartlike pimples. Cause: Green 
stink bugs. Adults are large, flat, shield-shaped, 
green bugs. Nymphs have reddish markings. 
Handpick adults to control mild infestations. 
For control if injury is severe, spray or dust 
plants with pyrethrin.
Pods with chewed holes. Cause: Cater­
pillars. Cover plants with row cover to exclude 
egg-laying moths if caterpillars have caused 
damage in the past. Control feeding worms 
with BTK spray.
Pods pitted and browned. Cause: Cold 
injury. Most cultivars may be damaged ai tem­
peratures below 45°F Protect late crops with 
row cover.
Dry beans tunneled. Cause: Bean weevils. 
Adults are gray or brown. Vio'-'/s" long snout 
beetles. Larvae are small and light-colored. 
To control this storage pest, dry seed in a 
125°F oven for 25 minutes, or store at 0°F for 
3-4 days to kill larvae.
Beet
Beta vulgaris 
Crassa group (Chenopodiaceae)
Beets are biennial vegetables grown for 
their firm, sweet roots and succulent greens. 
Cultivars with red, yellow, and red-and-white 
roots are available.
Culture
Beets grow best in deep, well-drained soil 
with a pH between 6.5 and 7.5. They are a 
cool-season plant and will tolerate tempera­
tures as low as 40°E However, plants will bolt 
if exposed to 2-3 weeks of temperatures below 
50°F after the first true leaves have formed. 
Beets grow poorly above 75° F and are best 
grown as a spring or fall crop. Keep soil moist, 
but not soggy since rapid and uninterrupted 
growth produces the best roots. Prevent prob­
lems by not planting beets in the same loca­
tion more often than every 3 years.
Leaf Problems
Leaves with purplish patches. Cause: 
Phosphorus deficiency. This is common in cool 
spring soils. Plants usually outgrow problem 
when soils warm. Spray leaves with seaweed 
extract to speed up recovery.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted. Cause: 
Nitrogen deficiency. This deficiency affects 
o ld er leaves first. Spray foliage an d  d ren ch  
roots with fish emulsion to alleviate symptoms.
Leaves yellow and curled; plant stunted. 
Cause: Aphids. Adults are soft-bodied, small, 
green, gray, black, or pinkish sucking insects, 
sometimes with a white fluffy coating. Knock 
aphids off the plants with a blast of water, or 
spray plants with insecticidal soap to control. 
If soap spray is not effective, apply a commer­
Cop

58 ■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
cial neem or pyrethrin spray.
Leaves with brown tips. Cause: Exces­
sive heat. Bright sun and 80°F temperatures 
may injure beet leaves. Plant in a partially 
shaded location or provide shade in climates 
with hot summers.
Leaves with dark-bordered, tan spots. 
Cause: Cercospora leaf spot. Destroy spotted 
leaves. Spray plants with copper if this fungal 
disease is severe to prevent further spread, or 
before symptoms develop if it has been a prob­
lem in the past. To prevent problems, soak 
seed in 122°F water for 25 minutes before 
planting. (Be aware that this treatment can 
damage seed viability; for complete instruc­
tions, see page 422.) Eliminate weeds that can 
harbor the disease. Plant cultivars. such as 
Big Red Hybrid’ and Red Ace*, that are toler­
ant of this disease.
Leaves with light-colored spots on upper 
leaf surfaces. Cause: Downy mildew. Leaves 
infected with this fungal disease have spots 
covered with white fuzzy growth on the 
undersides. Spray plants with copper when 
symptoms first appear.
Leaves stunted and crinkled. Cause: Curly 
top virus. There is no cure once plants are 
infected: destroy infected plants. Leafhoppers 
spread the virus as they feed; control them 
with sprays of insecticidal soap, or for severe 
infestations, neem or pyrethrin. Prevent prob­
lems by covering seedbed with row cover after 
planting.
Leaves with wandering, white or translu­
cent tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. Pale green, 
maggotlike larvae feed inside leaves, leaving 
empty tunnels behind them. Adults are tiny 
black-and-yellow insects. Once larvae have 
entered leaves, spraying will not control them. 
Destroy mined leaves. Catch adults with yel­
low sticky traps. Prevent problems by cover­
ing plants with row cover as soon as they 
emerge. Certain parasitic nematodes can attack 
leafminer larvae inside leaf tunnels.
Leaves riddled with small holes. Cause: 
Rea beetles. These small, shiny, black, brown, 
or bronze beetles hop when disturbed. Pre­
vent problems by covering plants with row 
cover as soon as they emerge.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Causes: 
Beet armyworms; garden webworms. Green­
ish brown, P/2" long caterpillars with a light- 
colored stripe on each side are beet armyworms. 
Pale green to nearly black. 1" long caterpillars 
with a black or light stripe down their backs 
and dark spots are garden webworms. Web­
worms roll leaf edges over. Handpick or spray 
actively feeding caterpillars with BTK in the 
evening.
Root Problems
Roots distorted, with rough, cracked skin.
Cause: Downy mildew. See “Leaves with light- 
colored spots on upper leaf surfaces” above 
for controls.
Roots with raised, rough, brown spots on 
surface. Cause: Scab. Prevent this fungal dis­
ease by adding compost to soil, and plant in 
raised beds to improve drainage.
Roots with black, dead, hard spots in flesh. 
Cause: Boron deficiency. Roots may be wrin­
kled or cracked. Plants can be stunted; leaf 
edges may be brown and lower leaf surfaces 
may be reddish purple. Prevent deficiency 
problems by spraying plants with seaweed 
extract as soon as the first true leaves appear, 
and every few weeks thereafter. Check defi­
ciency with a soil test. Correct by adding 1 
tablespoon of borax dissolved in 1 gallon water, 
or 10 pounds of kelp, per 100 square feet of soil.
Roots forked. Cause: Calcium deficiency. 
Prevent problems by keeping soil evenly moist. 
If soil test shows deficiency, add gypsum, or if 
pH is below 6.2, calcitic lime.
Roots small and poorly developed. Causes: 
Nitrogen deficiency; crowded roots. If leaves 
are small and yellow, feed plants with fish 
emulsion or compost tea to boost nitrogen

BEGONIA ■ 
39
level. Thin plants so roots don't touch to allow 
further growth.
Roots covered with hairy side roots; flesh 
woody. Cause: Curly top virus. See "Leaves 
stunted and crinkled" above for controls.
Roots unusually dark-colored. Cause: 
Potassium deficiency. Affected roots are prone 
to rot. If soil test confirms deficiency, amend 
soil as needed.
Roots light-colored; zoned rings in flesh 
very evident. Causes: Excessive heat; uneven 
soil moisture. Prevent problems by keeping 
soil evenly moist and mulching with straw 
during hot weather.
Begonia
Begonia. Tender perennials 
grown as annuals, and tubers.
The genus Begonia provides many beau­
tiful species that are well-adapted to garden 
culture. Outdoors, the most common types are 
the fibrous-rooted and tuberous-rooted begon­
ias. Each type has its own habits and needs.
The fibrous-rooted wax begonia, with its 
prolific flowering habit, is among the most 
popular bedding plants. Clusters of single or 
double, pink, white, or reddish flowers, up to 
2" across, appear in spring and continue until 
frost. Wax begonias do not always compete 
successfully with other annuals. Spotlight them 
in masses of 1 color. These are good plants to 
line the front of a sunny or partially shady 
border, growing only 6"-9" tall and up to 1' 
wide. In mild climates they may overwinter 
and live for years. They do well in window 
boxes and are widely grown as flowering and 
ornamental houseplants. Glossy wax begonia 
leaves are shades of green or red.
Tuberous-rooted begonias have fewer but 
larger and more showy blooms. The single or 
double flowers can grow to 6" or more across. 
They bloom on upright plants, growing to 2' 
tall, in bright and pastel shades of white, pink, 
red, yellow, and combinations. Tuberous-rooted 
begonias brighten up shady beds and borders.
Because powdery wax begonia seeds 
require much nurturing, many gardeners pre­
fer to buy bedding plants in spring for direct 
garden placement. If you do decide to grow 
your own, sow the tiny seeds indoors, 5 months 
before the final frost. Use a mix of fine peat 
and sand as the medium. Fluorescent lighting 
helps keep the desired warm temperature. Water 
seedlings from the bottom. When they are 
large enough to handle, transfer to 3" pots; 
transplant outdoors when night temperatures 
remain above 50°F Set plants 9" apart.
Start tuberous-rooted begonias indoors, 
planting them 8-10 weeks before your frost- 
free date in a loose growing medium. Barely 
cover tubers with the concave side up (it should 
have little pink buds coming out of the center) 
and moisten lightly. Give lots of water and 
light after the shoots emerge. Move tubers to 
individual 4" or 5" pots when shoots are 1 "-3" 
tall. After all danger of frost is past, plant in 
partial shade in fertile, moist but well-drained 
soil with plenty of organic matter. Water liber­
ally in warm weather. Feed every 3 weeks or 
so with compost tea or fish emulsion.
Begonias need rich, very well drained, 
light soil. Work in generous amounts of leaf 
mold, dehydrated manure, humus, and bone- 
meal. They tolerate full sun in cool climates 
only; in hot climates, leaves in full sun may 
show dry spotting from sunscald. Heavy shade, 
however, results in legginess and fewer flowers. 
Partial shade is generally best. Water when 
soil 1" below surface is still moist but not wet. 
Fertilize every 3-4 weeks.
If you want to overwinter tuberous-rooted 
begonias, lift the plants (with the soil still

40 
■ 
PROBLEM'-SOLVING PI ANT GUDE
attached) in fall when the leaves are yellow 
and withered. After a week or so, cut the 
stems to within a few inches of the tuber. Once 
the stem stub dries completely, shake the soil 
off the tubers and store in dry peat or coarse 
sand at 45°-55°E Start them again in spring.
Some gardeners dig up favored garden 
wax begonias, bringing them indoors before 
first frost to use as houseplants, then making 
cuttings in spring for garden use. As house­
plants, begonias may bloom most of the year. 
Pinch back stems by at least half to promote 
new growth. Keep soil damp but not wet. Mist 
leaves occasionally. Keep in sun or some shade. 
When bringing any plant indoors from out­
doors, consider that you also may be transfer­
ring pests and diseases indoors. These can 
spread rapidly to other household plants.
Problems
Leaves with powdery white patches.
Cause: Powdery mildew. This fungal disease 
is very common on begonias. For control in­
formation, see ‘ Leaves with powdery white 
patches’ on page 19.
Flower buds drop off. Causes: Excess 
water: high temperatures. Poor drainage and 
overwatering are the prime causes of early 
bud drop. Ease up on the watering and plant 
begonias in humus-rich soil with good drain­
age next time. Overly high temperatures also 
cause bud drop. In areas with unexpected 
hot spells, mulch roots and mist plants in late 
morning.
Leaves with angular brown blotches.
Cause: Leaf nematodes. Microscopic, worm- 
like creatures, known as leaf nematodes, may 
be feeding on the affected leaves. They cause 
brown blotches that enlarge until the leaves curl 
up and drop off. Symptoms usually appear 
on lower leaves first and spread to upper 
leaves. Plant growth is stunted: new leaves 
may not appear.
Remove and destroy infested leaves and 
the next 2 leaves directly above them. Do not 
let affected plants touch unaffected ones. Water 
from below rather than above: nematodes can 
move from one plant to another through water. 
Leaf nematodes can survive 3 or more years in 
the soil or surrounding debris. If you have a 
problem, don't replant begonias in that area.
Leaves with fuzzy, brown or gray spots. 
Cause: Botrytis gray mold. The Botrytis fun­
gus tends to attack weak plants. Once the 
resultant gray mold takes hold, the disease 
moves into healthy plant tissue. High humid­
ity and cool temperatures favor the infection 
process, as do crowded plantings, rain, and 
overhead watering. Botrytis gray mold fungus 
can be a year-round problem in mild winter 
areas. Remove and destroy infected leaves, 
stems, and flowers. Thin plants to encourage 
good air circulation.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
Both bacteria and fungi cause leaf spots on 
begonias. Bacterial leaf spot produces small 
blisters that are brown with yellow margins; 
fungi may form brown, black, or transparent 
spots. For control information, see “Leaves 
with spots” on page 19.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves, stems, and buds distorted” 
on page 20 for controls.
Leaves yellow; plant weakened. Cause: 
Whiteflies. For controls, see “Leaves yellow; 
plant weakened” on page 18.
Leaves and stems with white, cottony 
clusters. Cause: Mealybugs. See ‘‘Leaves and 
stems w'ith white, cottony clusters” on page 
20 for control information.
Stems with soft, water-soaked spots. 
Cause: Stem rot. Both bacterial and fungal 
infections can cause begonia stems to rot. If 
you catch the stem spots when they are small, 
try cutting them out with a razor blade or 
sharp knife. Remove and destroy seriously

BERBER1S ■ 
41
infected leaves, stems, and plants. These dis­
eases can spread quickly, so wash your hands 
and tools after working with infected plants. 
Avoid overcrowding and overhead watering; 
pick a site with good air circulation. Keep 
mulch a few inches away from the stem. Don’t 
replant begonias in affected areas.
Leaves with reddish brown lines. Cause: 
Thrips. These tiny, light brown, fast-moving 
insects generally attack leaves, causing red­
dish brown lines or spots on upper leaf surfaces 
and silvery blotches on leaf undersides. Stems, 
buds, and flowers can also be affected. Remove 
and destroy severely infested plants.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. See “Leaves with large, rag­
ged holes” on page 18 for controls.
Berberis
Barberry'. Shrubs.
Barberries are spiny deciduous or ever­
green shrubs commonly used as hedges, 
barriers, or foundation plants.
Barberries grow in sun or partial shade 
and prefer well-drained soil. They require lit­
tle care and tolerate even severe pruning. Set 
out container-grown or bare-root plants in spring 
or fall.
Pests and diseases are seldom a problem 
on cultivated barberries. Many states prohibit 
growing common barberry (Berberis vulgaris), 
which is an alternate host to a rust fungus that 
also attacks cereal grains. Check with your 
extension agent for local restrictions.
Problems
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: An-
thracnose. See “Leaves and shoots blackened; 
leaves with moist or brown sunken spots” on 
page 238 for control suggestions.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves wrinkled and discolored” 
on page 235 for control measures.
Leaves chewed; branch tips with webbing. 
Cause: Barberry webworms. These I1/:", black 
caterpillars tie together leaves and twigs, form­
ing a web nest in midsummer as they feed on 
the leaves. If not too numerous, remove nests 
by hand. Control large infestations with 3 appli­
cations of BTK made 1 week apart, or spray 
with pyrethrin.
Leaves shrivel and turn brown. Cause: 
Barberry wilt. This soilborne fungus attacks 
water-conducting tissue, causing leaves to wilt 
and eventually killing the entire plant. Remove 
the whole affected plant and its surrounding 
soil; replace with fresh soil.
Leaves with notched leaf margins. Cause: 
Japanese weevils. The 
brown adults attack 
foliage, and the legless white grubs feed on 
roots. Apply a sticky substance, such as 
Tanglefoot, to the lower stems to prevent adults 
from climbing up the plants. Drench the soil 
around the base of the plant with a solution of 
parasitic nematodes to control the larvae. 
Spray leaves several times with pyrethrin for 
major infestations of adults.
Twigs covered in small reddish brown 
bumps. Cause: Barberry scale. Heavy infes­
tations may cause yellowing foliage and stunted 
growth, leading to the death of the plant. Pests 
are most active in June and July. Spray twigs 
with dormant oil in early spring, before growth 
starts. During the growing season, spray plant 
with superior oil or repeated applications of 
insecticidal soap.
Whole plant stunted and lacking vigor. 
Cause: Nematodes. See “Whole plant stunted 
and lacking vigor” on page 239 for more 
information.

42 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Bergenia
Bergenia. Perennials.
Bergenias are sturdy, low-growing border 
plants with rose-pink flower clusters borne 
above the foliage in early spring. Broad, glossy 
leaves are 10" long and heart-shaped in the 
case of heartleaf bergenia (Bergenia cordi- 
folia), oval in the case of leather bergenia 
(B. crassifolia). The foliage takes on a dark 
burgundy color in fall; leaves are evergreen 
but often damaged by cold weather. Space 
plants 1 -l'/a' apart in average, well-drained 
soil in a partially shaded spot.
Bergenias’ large, low leaves form a haven 
for slugs and snails. See “Leaves with large, 
ragged holes" on page 177 for control 
information.
Betula
Birch. TVees.
Birches are deciduous trees with simple 
leaves. They are popular as single or multiple­
stemmed specimen trees; attractive features 
include their striking trunks, peeling bark, 
graceful branches, and magnificent fall color.
Most birches grow best in cool climates 
and almost invariably perform better in the 
northern portions of their range. Choose a 
site with light shade and moist but well-drained, 
acidic soil. Transplant in spring as balled-and- 
burlapped specimens. Don’t prune in winter 
or early spring, when trees can “bleed” sap; 
late summer is a better time.
Birches are relatively short-lived, espe­
cially when stressed, and they are beset by a 
number of insect pests that can cause serious 
damage and even loss. Fortunately, you can 
prevent most of the common problems by 
planting trees in the right conditions and keep­
ing them vigorous. Fertilize regularly, and water 
deeply during drought. Some species, such as 
river birch [Betula nigra), are less prone to 
common birch pests.
Those species that are noted for their 
predominantly white bark develop this char­
acteristic slowly; do not be disturbed if the 
young plant you have acquired is not white 
when you get it!
Problems
Leaves blister and turn brown. Cause: 
Birch leafminers. Perhaps the most serious 
and prevalent of all birch pests, birch leafminers 
produce ‘A", white larvae that feed between 
the upper and lower surfaces of the leaves. 
Several generations occur each year; the first, 
usually active in May, is most destructive. 
Remove infested leaves. Repeated applications 
of insecticidal soap will kill the small, black, 
sawflylike adults, reducing future populations.
Leaves yellow; branch tips dead or dying; 
trunk with lumps under bark. Cause: Bronze 
birch borers. The adults are V A l", blunt­
headed, reddish gray beetles that feed on the 
foliage, and then lay their eggs in slits in the 
bark. The eggs hatch into light-colored grubs 
that tunnel through the bark into the sapwood, 
starting from the top of the tree and working 
downward. By the time you see the symptoms, 
it is usually too late to save the tree. If the 
damage is not yet severe, you could try prun­
ing out and destroying the infested parts. The 
best control for borers is planting trees in the 
right conditions and keeping them healthy 
and vigorous. Avoid planting European white 
birch [B. pendula), which is very susceptible 
to this pest.
Leaves skeletonized. Causes: Canker-

BLACKBERRY ■ 
43
worms; birch skeletonizers; Japanese beetles. 
Cankerworms are ‘/A 1", yellow, green, or brown 
caterpillars that feed on the foliage of birches, 
often defoliating the tree. To avoid this problem, 
apply a band of a sticky substance, such as 
Tanglefoot, around the base of the tree in 
spring to keep females from climbing up the 
tree and laying their eggs. Apply fresh coats in 
September and February to trap both spring 
and fall cankerworms. If their feeding becomes 
a problem, spray with BTK as soon as you 
notice them, and continue every 2 weeks until 
the pests are gone.
Birch skeletonizers also feed on foliage, 
leaving brown leaves with visible leaf veins 
behind. These 
yellowish green caterpil­
lars do the most damage in July and August. 
In most cases this pest is a problem only every 
few years, and the damage happens so late 
in the season that no control is necessary. 
If you want to protect young trees from seri­
ous damage, apply BTK or superior oil as 
soon as you spot pests in midsummer.
Japanese beetles are foliage feeders, too. 
For information on controlling them, see 
“Leaves skeletonized” on page 236.
Plant defoliated. Cause: Gypsy moths. 
See “Plant defoliated” on page 236 for control 
suggestions.
Trunk or branch crotches with swollen, 
cracked lesions. Cause: Canker. This fungal 
disease attacks at the forks of branches, caus­
ing swellings that crack open to expose the 
wood. The callus tissue that forms may also 
be affected. The canker can eventually girdle 
and kill the branch or tree. If the canker is 
small, cut out the tissue involved; cut down 
and destroy seriously infected trees. Healthy 
trees are less susceptible.
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. See 
“Leaves tunneled” on page 237 for controls.
Leaves wilt or curl and pucker. Cause: 
Birch aphids. These small, pear-shaped insects 
attack the foliage, weakening and distorting
the growth. They also produce copious quan­
tities of honeydew, which attracts ants and 
encourages the growth of black-colored, sooty 
mold. Spray plants with a strong jet of water to 
knock off the pests. For serious infestations, 
apply insecticidal soap, or pyrethrin spray as a 
last resort.
Branches die. Cause: Dieback. This fun­
gal disease produces symptoms very similar to 
those caused by bronze birch borers, except 
for the lumpy bark. Trees weakened by drought, 
low fertility, or borers are most susceptible to 
infection. Prevent this problem by planting 
trees in the right spot and watering during 
drought to keep them growing vigorously. If 
symptoms do occur, prune out and destroy or 
dispose of infected branches.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with 
powdery white coating” on page 237 for 
controls.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots” on page 237 for con­
trol suggestions.
Blackberry
Rubus spp. ( Rosaceae)
Blackberries are perennials that bear fruit 
on second-year canes. Some cultivars grow 
erect and some bear long, trailing canes. Black­
berries are hardy in Zones 5-8.
Like other bramble fruits, blackberries 
need full sun and well-drained, moisture- 
retentive soil. Train plants to posts or fences. 
Prune annually. Pull unwanted suckers. On 
erect blackberries pinch the tips of 3' canes to 
force growth of lateral shoots. During the dor­
mant season, shorten all lateral shoots to about

44 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
1xti. For both types of blackberry, cut away all 
fruiting canes right after harvest. In winter 
thin out canes leaving 3 or 4 canes per clump 
for erect types and 8-12 canes per clump for 
trailing types.
Blackberries are self-pollinating and 
require no cross-pollination to set fruit. Black­
berries belong to the same genus as raspber­
ries and are affected by similar insects and 
diseases. For more information on problems 
and solutions, see the Raspberry entry begin­
ning on page 196.
Problems
Flowers with reddish, twisted petals; no 
fruit set. Cause: Double blossom. Double 
blossom, known as rosette, also causes plants 
to throw out witch’s brooms, dense masses of 
deformed twigs with pale leaves. To control 
this fungal disease, remove infected canes as 
soon as you notice them. To help prevent the 
spread of the fungus, spray the whole planting 
with copper 2 or 3 times at 10-day intervals. If 
the disease is rampant, mow down the whole 
planting and destroy the newly cut canes. Avoid 
planting sites near wild brambles, which may 
carry the disease. Resistant cultivars include 
‘Flordagrand’ and ‘Humble’.
Fruit covered with light gray fuzz. Cause: 
Fruit rot. Especially common during wet 
weather, this fungal disease appears less fre­
quently where plants have good air circula­
tion and proper pruning. To control fruit rot, 
harvest berries often. Also pick and discard 
infected fruit far away from plants.
Fruit tails to ripen or remains red and 
sour. Cause: Redberry mites. Control these 
microscopic mites with lime-sulfur applied 
in early spring when new shoots are 1" long 
and again when canes have about 1' of new 
growth.
Canes and leaves with purple spots.
Causes: Anthracnose: leaf and cane spot
disease. Controls are the same for both these 
fungal diseases. Keep plantings well-pruned 
to promote good air circulation. Remove and 
destroy infected canes right after harvest. Early 
in the season, spray with lime-sulfur. Cultivars 
resistant to both diseases include ‘Black Satin’, 
‘Dirksen Thornless', and ‘Gem’.
Leaf undersides with bright orange pus­
tules appearing in spring. Cause: Orange rust. 
This incurable fungal disease infects the entire 
plant and can t be controlled by spraying. Plants 
become weak and unfruitful. Diseased plants 
never recover; infection spreads quickly to 
neighboring plants. Dig and destroy plants as 
soon as you notice disease symptoms. Avoid 
sites near wild blackberries, which may carry 
the disease. Late in the season, a benign leaf 
rust appears on some blackberries; disregard 
it. The cultivars ‘Cheyenne', ‘Comanche', 
'Eldorado', ‘Evergreen', and ‘Shawnee' are 
resistant to orange rust.
Canes dying. Cause: Borers. For infor­
mation identifying and controlling borers, 
see ‘‘Canes dying, break off easily” and “Cane 
tips wilted and dying” on page 199.
Canes turn yellow and die in midsummer. 
Cause: Verticillium wilt. This is a common 
soilborne fungal disease. Typically, leaves yel­
low, wilt, and fall before the entire cane dies. 
Avoid planting blackberries following other 
Verticillium-susceptible crops, such as straw­
berries, potatoes, tomatoes, and eggplants. 
Soil solarization may prevent the disease. 
Verticillium-resistant cultivars include ‘Ever­
green*, ‘Logan*. ‘M arion’, and ‘Olallie’. See 
page 197 for an illustration of this disease on 
raspberries.
Canes with wartlike or corky swellings; 
canes dying. Cause: Crown gall. Crown gall 
bacteria live in the soil and enter plants through 
wounds. For information and controls, see 
“Canes with wartlike or corky swellings: canes 
dying" on page 199.

Bl.tEBERRY 
■ 
45
Blueberry
Vaccinitim spp. (Ericaceae)
Blueberries are deciduous shrubs rang­
ing in height from 1'for lowbush blueberries 
(Vaccinium angustifolium) to 6' for highbush 
blueberries (V. corvmbosum) to over 30' for 
rabbiteye blueberries ( V ashei). The flowers 
look like dainty white bells and appear in 
spring on shoots that grew the previous season. 
Blueberries are hardy in Zones 3-9, depend­
ing on species and cultivar.
Culture
Blueberries require full sun and well- 
drained. moisture-retentive, acidic soil with a 
pH of 4.0-5.0. Of the 3 species, highbush blue­
berries are the most finicky about soil. Blue­
berries generally grow well in soil enriched 
with acidic organic material, such as peat moss, 
composted pine needles or oak leaves, or com­
post made from pine, oak, or hemlock bark. 
Fertilize with acidic fertilizers, such as cotton­
seed meal or soybean meal. Blueberries enjoy 
a thick, organic mulch.
Most blueberries are not wholly self- 
pollinating. Plant at least 2 different cultivars 
near each other for adequate cross-pollination.
Prune plants each winter, beginning when 
bushes are about 4 years old. On highbush 
and rabbiteye plants, remove drooping or very 
old branches and thin oui branches where 
growth is too dense. Cut lowbush plants to the 
ground every third year for a harvest every 2 
out of 3 years.
Flower and Fruit Problems
Berries soft and mushy. Cause: Blueberry 
maggots. If you find 7#", white maggots inside 
berries, you've discovered the larvae of the
blueberry maggot fly. This insect, closely related 
to the apple maggot fly, deposits eggs just 
under the skin of the fruit from late June to 
August. Eggs hatch into fruit-devouring mag­
gots that later drop to the soil and pupate over 
the winter. To reduce the number of maggots 
that pupate in the soil through the next winter, 
harvest frequently and destroy any infested 
berries you find. Another control is to trap 
adult flies on sticky red spheres like the ones 
used to trap apple maggot flies. Hang 1 trap 
per highbush plant or 1 per several lowbush 
plants before the first berries turn blue. For 
information on making these maggot fly traps, 
see "Fruit dimpled; brown tunnels through 
flesh” on page 22.
Berries shriveled and webbed together with 
silk. Causes: Cherry fruitworms; cranberry 
fruitworms. Berries will contain sawdustlike 
material and either a white caterpillar (cherry 
fruitworm) or a yellowish green caterpillar 
(cranberry fruitworm). These are the larvae 
of 2 different moth species that lay eggs on 
berries in the spring. Larvae hatching from 
these eggs bore into berries near the stem end 
and web berries together as they feed. You 
cannot spray anything to kill worms inside the 
fruit. To reduce damage from these pests with­
out sprays, harvest berries frequently and 
destroy infested fruit to prevent larvae from 
maturing. Regularly cleaning up dropped and 
damaged berries will do as much as anything 
to keep fruitworms under control.
Berries drop early; mature berries turn 
gray, shriveled, and hard. Cause: Mummy 
berry. This fungal disease overwinters on dried, 
diseased berries called mummies and spreads 
most rapidly in cold, wet springs. Control 
mummy berry by picking all mummies off the 
plant. In the spring cultivate around bushes to 
bury dropped mummies, or add mulch to cover 
the remaining fungal spores. Resistant culti­
vars include Bluetta\ ‘Burlington’, ‘Collins'.

46 ■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUDE
Darrow\ ‘Dixie’, ’Jersey*, and ‘Rubel’.
Blossoms covered with brown splotches 
or brownish gray mold. Cause: Botrytis blight. 
This fungal disease spreads most rapidly when 
cool, wet weather extends throughout the bloom 
period. An effective control for Botrytis is to 
carry a paper bag into the garden and care­
fully pick off and discard blighted blossoms 
and foliage as soon as you find them. After 
working around infected plants, wash your 
hands thoroughly before working with healthy 
plants. Also space and prune plants to encour­
age good air circulation and rapid drying of 
plants after rain. Avoid wetting the foliage 
when watering and avoid excess fertilization, 
which brings on lush growth and increased 
susceptibility to this blight.
Fruit disappears. Cause: Birds. These 
creatures love blueberries so much that unpro­
tected bushes are often stripped clean of berries, 
even before they are fully ripe! The only sure 
protection is a net draped over the planting 
and held to the ground to prevent birds from 
getting underneath.
Leaf and Branch Problems
New leaves with black centers; growing 
tips wilted. Cause: Mummy berry. This fun­
gal disease spreads most easily in cold, wet 
spring weather. For more information, see “Ber­
ries drop early: mature berries turn gray, 
shriveled, and hard" on page 45.
Leaves or twigs covered with brownish 
gray mold. Cause: Botrytis blight. An effec­
tive control for this fungal disease is to remove 
and discard blighted foliage as soon as you see 
it. For more information, see "Blossoms cov­
ered with brown splotches or brownish gray 
mold" above.
New leaves yellow with green veins. 
Cause: Iron deficiency. The soil usually has 
sufficient iron but is not acidic enough to 
make iron available to the plant. Spray leaves
with iron salts or chelates for quick relief of 
symptoms. A long-term solution is to reduce 
the soil pH by mulching with an acidic material, 
such as pine needles.
Cane dieback. Causes: Blueberry cane 
canker: Fusicoccum canker. Blueberry cane 
canker, most prevalent in the South, shows up 
as reddish, conical stem swellings. The next 
year these swellings become blisterlike, light 
gray, and then black and fissured. If this dis­
ease is a problem in your area, plant rabbiteye 
blueberries, which are not susceptible to cane 
canker. Or plant highbush cultivars resistant 
to cane canker, including ‘Atlantic* and ‘Jersey*.
Fusicoccum canker, a fungal disease more 
common in colder regions, begins as red stem 
spots that enlarge and develop a bull’s-eye 
pattern. Resistant cultivars include ‘Berkeley*, 
Blueray*, ‘Burlington, ‘Coville*. and ‘Rubel*. 
Other blights also cause cane dieback, and 
the best course for all such problems is to 
prune away diseased branches as soon as you 
spot them. To avoid spreading disease further 
as you prune, sterilize pruning tools between 
cuts in isopropyl alcohol or a 10 percent bleach 
solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts water).
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Japanese 
beetles. Beginning in early summer, these metal­
lic blue-green beetles with bronze wing covers 
like to feed on plants in the sun. The simplest 
control is to check plants early in the morning 
while beetles are sluggish and knock them off 
leaves into jars of soapy water. Traps baited 
with floral or fruit scents plus pheromones 
may be effective if placed at some distance 
from plants, but some gardeners find that a 
trap placed in the middle of a planting attracts 
more beetles than normal to the garden. If 
you use traps, be sure to place them well away 
from the plantings you're trying to protect.
Populations of this pest naturally decline 
by midsummer, but for very' heavy infestations, 
spray with neem. Milky disease spores, avail­

HROWA1JJA 
■ 
47
able commercially and applied to lawns to kill 
Japanese beetle grubs, may not work very well 
to control this pest. Not all the grubs in your 
yard will become infected with the disease, 
and beetles that emerge from neighboring prop­
erties may fly to your plants. You can also buy 
parasitic nematodes to apply to the soil for 
control of Japanese beetle grubs.
Broccoli
Brassica oleracea 
Botrytis group (Cruciferae)
Broccoli is a cool-season vegetable grown 
for its crisp green heads of flower buds. Broc­
coli and cabbage require similar culture and 
are attacked by the same diseases and insects: 
See the Cabbage entry beginning on page 52 
for culture and information on problems.
Prevent problems by planting the follow­
ing improved cultivars: ‘Green Dwarf #36’, 
‘Em peror, and ‘Mariner are black rot-toler­
ant; Premium Crop* is resistant to Fusarium 
yellows; ‘Citation’. ‘Emperor. ‘Esquire, ‘Green 
Dwarf #36*, ‘Hi-Caliber’, and ‘Mariner’ are 
tolerant of downy mildew; and De Cicco' is 
tolerant of flea beetles.
In addition to the problems listed below, 
transplants exposed to cool tem peratures 
(35°-45°F) for 10 days or more may form tiny, 
useless flower heads prematurely. High tem­
peratures can cause similar tiny head formation. 
Broccoli grows best at temperatures between 
45°-75°F Harvest heads when buds are still 
tight and dark green or dusky violet, except 
for ‘Romanesco’. which should be yellow-green.
Problems
Heads small and uneven; stems hollow.
Cause: Potassium deficiency. Prevent prob­
lems by spraying plants with seaweed extract 
every 2 weeks. Check soil potassium with a soil 
test and amend as necessary.
Heads with black or discolored centers. 
Causes: Fungal rot; cold injury. Broccoli heads 
rot when water collects between the individ­
ual flower buds. Avoid wetting heads when 
watering. Cold weather can also cause black 
areas in the center of heads. Protect plants 
with row cover when temperatures below 40°F 
are predicted.
Browallia
Browallia, sapphire flower. Annuals.
Browallias bear profuse quantities of pur­
ple or blue, 1 "-2" flowers. They grow in bush 
form. 10"-18" high, or will cascade over con­
tainer edges. They bloom in summer and into 
fall. Browallias do well as bedding plants, hang­
ing baskets, or houseplants.
Browallias grow easily from seed. Sow 
indoors in March. Do not cover seed: they 
need light to germinate. Seedlings appear in 2 
weeks. Pinch when 6" tall for bushier plants. 
Transplant when night temperatures remain 
consistently above 50°F; space 10" apart.
Browallias need partial shade and mod­
erately rich soil. Keep the soil evenly moist. 
Fertilize lightly but regularly. Pests and dis­
eases seldom bother browallias. Whiteflies 
sometimes feed on plants; see “Leaves yellow; 
plant weakened’’ on page 18.

48 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GLIDE
Brussels Sprouts
Brassica oleracea 
Gcmmifcra group (Cruciferae)
Brussels sprouts are a cool-season vege­
table grown for their small, cabbage-shaped 
buds. They are one of the hardiest members 
of the cabbage family and can tolerate lower 
pH (5.5-6.8) than any of the other brassicas. 
But, they are less tolerant of heat. In warmer 
climates grow sprouts in soil with a high clay 
content if you have a choice, and shade the 
soil around roots. Harvest sprouts when they 
are 1" in diameter or smaller and still tight. 
Twist them off gently, starting at the base.
Brussels sprouts and cabbage require sim­
ilar culture and are attacked by the same dis­
eases and insects: See the Cabbage entry 
beginning on page 52 for culture and informa­
tion on problems.
In addition to problems outlined in the cab­
bage entry, a combination of cold injury and 
viral disease can cause leaves with black specks. 
Destroy infected plants. Caterpillars will bore 
small holes into sprouts; see “Leaves with large, 
ragged holes” on page 56 for more details and 
controls. Plants deficient in potassium have 
poorly developed sprouts: Spray with seaweed 
extract at transplanting and repeat several times 
to prevent problems. Check potassium levels 
with a soil test, and amend as necessary.
Buddleia
Butterfly bush. Shrubs.
Butterfly bush (Buddleia davidii) is a decid­
uous shrub producing long spikes of bloom in 
midsummer. In severe climates it tends to die
back to the roots over winter; where this does 
not occur, cut plants back to near ground level 
to promote healthy growth and flowering.
Buddleias thrive in rich, loamy soil in full 
sun. They are remarkably free of insect and 
disease problems. Japanese beetles have been 
known to attack them, but rarely severely. 
Handpicking or inoculating your lawn with 
milky disease spores will usually suffice; 
stronger control methods can endanger the 
butterflies that these plants attract.
Bulbs
The term bulb is used to describe a vari­
ety of underground storage organs, including 
corms, rhizomes, and tuberous roots. Some 
are modified stems, while others are simply 
enlarged roots. Although structurally different, 
bulbs all store food for plant growth in subse­
quent seasons and spread (in the case of rhi­
zomes) or otherwise multiply asexually to 
increase a plant’s population.
Whether they are hardy corms, such as 
crocuses, that bloom year after year in the 
same spot, or tender rhizomes, such as cannas, 
that must be dug up and stored over winter, 
bulbs generally enjoy similar growing envi­
ronments and suffer similar problems. Pest 
and disease prevention is preferable to apply­
ing controls after trouble arises. The follow­
ing bulb-buyer’s guidelines will help you avoid 
most bulb problems.
■ Buy only dormant bulbs that show little, 
if any, root development and no topgrowth 
other than a pale, fat bud. (Lilies, however, are 
never completely dormant; their bulbs often 
have fleshy roots attached.)
■ Purchase and plant bulbs at the right 
time. Reputable dealers sell bulbs in defined

Bl LBS ■ 
49
BUYING HEALTHY BULBS
streaking 
at base of bulb
Basal bulb rot
Larvae 
chew bulbs
shriveled bulb
Unhealthy bulbs
Narcissus bulb fly
Choosing bulbs carefully is an important step toward a beautiful and 
care-free flower garden. Select bulbs, such as the healthy daffodil 
pictured, that seem heavy for their size and that are free of cuts, 
bruises, and discoloration. Be wan' of lightweight or shriveled bulbs.
Tunic
Firm, 
healthy flesh
Healthy bulb
V
Adult
seasons: fall for spring-flowering bulbs (daf­
fodils, tulips), spring for summer-flowering bulbs 
(lilies, glads), and summer for fall-flowering 
species (some crocuses).
■ Look for bulbs that have their papery 
skins—called tunics—intact. These contain 
natural compounds that inhibit disease and 
premature sprouting.
■ Choose bulbs packaged in materials 
that permit air to enter. Damp bulbs in plastic 
bags often rot.
■ Select bulbs that are firm with few wrin­
kles and no soft spots. Healthy bulbs seem 
somewhat heavier than their size suggests. 
Avoid unusually lightweight bulbs and those 
with cuts, dark or water-soaked spots, or dis­
colored or scabby areas.
Growing healthy, trouble-free bulbs also 
depends on good cultural practices. Reshy 
bulbs are prone to bacterial and fungal rot 
organism s, most of which thrive in wet 
conditions. Prepare bulb planting beds well 
and make sure the soil is well-drained. Handle 
bulbs carefully when planting to avoid inju­
ries that provide access to diseases. Remove 
problem plants quickly to keep pests and dis­
eases from spreading. Always let bulb foliage 
die back naturally to allow food production 
for growth and flowering in subsequent years. 
Mark sites where bulbs are planted so you can 
find them after foliage has faded. Clean up 
flower beds in fall to remove plant debris that 
offers shelter to many pests and diseases.
Healthy bulbs and good culture go a long 
way toward successful plantings. A few pests
Copyrighted material

50 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT (HIDE
and diseases, however, are prevalent among 
bulbous plants; controls for these problems 
do not vary significantly among species.
Problems
Leaves yellow or distorted; bulbs decayed.
Cause: Bulb mites. These '/jo'-Vfc", whitish 
mites feed in groups on bulbs. Infested bulbs 
have corky, brown spots that become powdery. 
Bulb mites are attracted to damaged or rot­
ting bulbs, but can move to healthy ones, 
carrying rot-producing fungi and bacteria as 
they travel. When buying bulbs, inspect them 
carefully for damage or signs of infestation; 
for more information, see the illustration on 
page 49. Dip bulbs in hot (120°F) water for a 
few minutes to kill mites. Dig and destroy 
severely infested bulbs; solarize the soil before 
planting in previously infested ground.
Leaves and/or flowers with holes. Causes: 
Japanese beetles: other leaf-eating beetles. A 
number of hungry beetles, including 'A" long 
black blister beetles, •/«" long spotted cucum­
ber beetles. ’A" long, reddish brown rose cha­
fers, and nocturnal, Vj" long, gray Fuller rose 
beetles feed on the leaves and sometimes the 
blossoms of flowering bulbs. Iridescent green- 
and-bronze, Vi” Japanese beetles top this list 
of troublesome pests; the adults devour the 
leaves, stalks, and flowers of nearly 300 plant 
species, while the V«M, C-shaped grub larvae 
feed on roots and are a major pest of turf 
grasses.
Injury caused by adult beetles ranges from 
sm all holes in leaves to skeletonized foliage to 
complete defoliation; feeding by weevils, such 
as long-nosed Fuller rose beetles, resembles 
“ticket punches” around leaf margins. Japan­
ese and spotted cucumber beetles are fond of 
flowers and often do most of their damage 
there. Most beetles are active during the day 
and are large enough to be readily visible 
while they feed. Weevils more often prefer 
nighttime feeding.
Handpick adult beetles into a bucket
of soapy water or a 5 percent solution of 
isopropyl alcohol. Wear gloves if your pests 
are blister beetles: contact with crushed bee­
tles causes burns and blisters on skin. Shake 
infested plants in early morning to knock bee­
tles onto a dropcloth, then scoop them up and 
destroy. Pheromone traps are available for 
Japanese beetles, but they are most helpful if 
you can convince your neighbors to use them, 
too; otherwise, your traps may just attract 
beetles from their yard into yours. Apply milky 
disease spores to your lawn for long-term lar­
val control. Apply parasitic nematodes to soil 
to limit all beetle grub populations. As a last 
resort, spray affected plants with neem or 
pyrethrin.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. Differing only in the pres­
ence or absence of a shell, slugs and snails 
range in size from %" to 8" and may be gray, 
tan, green, black, yellow, or spotted. Broad 
foliage, arising at or near the soil surface, 
makes many flowering bulbs appealing to these 
busy mollusks. Mulch provides shady hiding 
places from which they emerge to feed noc- 
tumally. All species rasp large holes in leaves, 
stems, and bulbs; slimy trails of mucus also 
signal their presence.
Since slugs and snails travel over the ground 
on a flat, muscular foot, you can impede their 
progress with barriers of materials that irritate 
their soft bodies. Sprinkle bands of coarse, 
dry, scratchy materials such as cinders, wood 
ashes, cedar sawdust, and diatomaceous earth 
around plants or beds: renew frequently. Push 
4"-8" copper strips into the soil around beds 
as edging. Lay boards, cabbage leaves, or over­
turned clay pots—anything that offers a cool, 
damp daytime haven —around the garden; 
destroy pests that congregate underneath. Hand- 
pick slugs and snails from plants at night: 
drop them into soapy water or sprinkle them 
with table salt to dehydrate and kill them. Set 
shallow pans into the soil, placing the lip flush 
with the soil surface and fill with stale beer or

BUXUS 
■ 
51
any fermenting liquid; remove drowned pests 
daily. Encourage predatory ground beetles 
by maintaining clover, sod, or stone walk­
ways.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. Sev­
eral species of pear-shaped, Vm'-'A " aphids 
attack flowering bulbs. Aphids can be green, 
pink, black, gray, or with a white fluffy coating 
and have long antennae and 2 short tubes 
projecting from the rear of their abdomens. 
These pests gather under leaves and on grow­
ing tips. Some, such as tulip bulb aphids, also 
infest bulbs, clustering beneath the tunic. 
Aphids suck plant sap, causing leaf and bud 
distortion and blossom and leaf drop. Their 
feeding may spread viral diseases. As they 
feed, they excrete sticky honeydew on which 
sooty molds grow; see “Leaves with black coat­
ing" below for more information.
Wash aphids from plants with a strong 
spray of water; repeat as needed to control 
infestations. Encourage natural predators and 
parasites such as aphid midges, assassin bugs, 
lacewings, lady beetles, and spiders. If water 
sprays fail, apply homemade garlic or tomato- 
leaf sprays, or try sprays of alcohol, citrus oil, 
insecticidal soap, or neem. Use boric acid 
baits to control ants that herd aphids onto 
plants. As a last resort, spray or dust aphids 
with pyrethrin.
Leaves with black coating. Cause: Sooty 
mold. This fungus grows on the sugary, sticky 
honeydew produced by aphids and other suck­
ing pests such as scales, whiteflies, and mealy­
bugs. The black fungal coating doesn’t harm 
leaves directly, but it does shade the leaves 
and reduce growth. The best control is to deal 
with the pests that are producing the honey­
dew. Identify the pest and apply the appropri­
ate control. (If the plant itself doesn’t show 
signs of pest damage, the honeydew may be 
dripping down from an overhanging plant.) On 
small plants, wipe the leaves with a damp cloth 
to remove the honeydew and the sooty mold.
Buxus
Boxwood. Shrubs.
Boxwoods are evergreen shrubs with 
glossy, opposite leaves. They are widely used 
for hedges.
Boxwoods prefer a site partially sheltered 
from winter winds. They will flourish in a 
range of conditions, from full sun to deep 
shade, and can adapt to almost any soil (with 
the exception of poorly drained sites or heavy 
clays). Set out as balled-and-burlapped or 
container-grown plants in spring. Set out plants 
no deeper than they grew in the nursery. A thick 
layer of mulch will help keep roots cool and 
retain moisture. Clean up all fallen leaves and 
remove debris from branch crotches in autumn.
Problems
Leaves blistered and browned. Cause; 
Boxwood leafminers. The ’A", orange larvae 
tunnel and feed within leaves. After they feed, 
the maggots change to the adult form and 
emerge as •/«", orange, mosquito-like flies. Use 
yellow sticky traps to monitor the emergence 
of adults. When they begin to appear (usually 
late April and early May), spray plants with 
superior oil.
Leaves curled and cupped around stem 
tips. Cause: Boxwood psyllids. The eggs and 
larvae of this tiny green insect overwinter on 
buds and infest new leaves in spring. Spray 
plants with insecticidal soap, or pyrethrin for 
serious infestations, at the first sign of damage.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See “Leaves stippled 
with yellow; foliage webbed’’ on page 236 for 
controls.
Leaves brown; twigs die back. Cause: 
Winter damage. Cold, dry winter winds can 
seriously injure tender growth. Avoid damage 
by spraying leaves with an antidesiccant in

52 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
fall, or provide shelter for plants with burlap 
windbreaks. Mulch heavily in fall, and water 
well before the ground freezes. Fertilize plants 
in early spring only; summer feeding promotes 
easily damaged, late-season growth. Prune out 
affected parts.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bum ps' on page 237 for control suggestions.
Leaves yellow, sparse, distorted, or with 
brown edges; branches die; growth stunted.
Cause: Decline. For more information, see 
“Leaves yellow, sparse, distorted, or with brown 
edges; branches die; growth stunted" on page 
238.
Whole plant stunted and lacking vigor.
Cause: Nematodes. See “Whole plant stunted 
and lacking vigor" on page 239 for controls.
Cabbage
Brassica oleracea 
Capitata group (Cruciferae)
Cabbage is a cool-season vegetable grown 
for its crisp, dense leaf heads. T here are green 
and purple cultivars and ones with savoyed, or 
crinkled, leaves.
Culture
Plant cabbages in full sun in a site with 
fertile, well-drained soil and a pH between 6.0 
and 6.8. If you have a choice of sites, spring 
plantings do best in lighter, sandier soils, while 
fall plantings do better in soils that contain
more clay. Plants grow best at temperatures 
between 40° and 75°F
Cabbages are biennial, and transplants 
exposed to cool temperatures (35°-45°F) for 
10 or more days may bolt or go to flower 
prematurely. High temperatures also cause 
bolting.
These plants have very shallow roots, so 
be sure to keep the top few inches of soil from 
drying out. Fluctuations in soil moisture after 
the heads have formed may cause them to 
split. Mulching helps to balance and conserve 
moisture. Most cabbage diseases need free 
water to spread, so don't water with overhead 
sprinklers.
To avoid problems, don’t plant cabbages 
where members of the cabbage family (broccoli, 
cauliflower, brussels sprouts, or kale) have 
grown for at least 3 years. Also, avoid areas
Copyrighted ma

CABBAGE 
■ 
53
CABBAGE ♦ 
and Why 
^
S jL eav es with ^
 
HP large, ragged 
noles. Cause: 
Cabbage loopers. 
i  
Green larvae, adults > 
are gray m oths.
f r  'M-jOSk .
* 
wingspan
9 m 
\ 
<
.Leaves with brown 
.-to gray spots; stem  
has sunken areas.
^Cause: Black leg. 
Sunken areas may 
( 
.girdle stems. 
f j i
Leave* 
f  
'
w ith large, r  
^
ragged holes. 
N . ■
' ■- 
V \
Cause: Imported 
cabbageworms. Larvae a re *** 
slowmo\ ing green caterpillars: 
adults are white 
butterflies. 
8
Adult
Leaves with pale spots, white growth 
on undersides. Cause: Downy mildew. 
Heads have dark patches on leaves
*  
ty- 
that turn tan and papery.
* 
-  i
Larva
Larva
Leaves with 
... 
yellow. V- 
shaped spots 
'/-J 
on m argins.
Cause: Black 
rot. Leaves 
- 
d.c. drop. 
... 
black
/ r "  
streaks
in stems.
i
' * r /  j
Leaves yellow: j V hI
A
 W
i
7  
>
*
£
Dark stem tissue
plants stunted: 
stem s tw isted.
J  Cause: Fusarium 
| yellows. Leaves 
‘
V ' ?
f. drop starting at 
the. bottom
'SiS
/
ives yellow; 
plants stunted;
W plants wilt on 
''bright, hot days.
'Cause: Cabbage maggots.
* *  Roots of infested plants are riddled 
with slimy, winding tunnels.
Maggots
Adult
Leaves riddled with 
small holes. Cause: Striped flea 
beetles. Small, shiny, black beetles 
hop actively when disturbed.

I
54 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PIANT GUIDE
with cabbage family weeds, such as wild mus­
tard. Destroy all crop residues, including roots, 
after harvest.
If you start your own plants, soak the 
seed in 122°F water for 25 minutes before 
planting to eliminate seed-borne diseases. (Be 
aware that this treatment can damage seed 
viability: for complete instructions, see page 
422.) Once your seeds have germinated, grow 
seedlings at 60°F to keep them short and stocky.
Cabbages are heavy feeders and are sus­
ceptible to several nutrient deficiencies, includ­
ing boron, calcium, phosphorus, and potassium.
Problems
Stems of transplants shrunken and dark 
near soil line. Cause: Wirestem. Weak plants 
may wilt and die as the disease progresses; 
seedlings that survive yield poorly. Later in 
the season, the same fungal disease rots the 
head from the bottom up. Spray plants with 
copper before symptoms develop if you have 
had problems in the past.
Leaves of transplants purple. Cause: Phos­
phorus deficiency. Phosphorus is not readily 
available in cool spring soils. Spray plants 
with seaweed extract to correct.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted. Cause: 
Nitrogen deficiency. When this deficiency de­
velops, older leaves turn yellow first. Spray 
plants and drench roots with fish emulsion 
to correct.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted; plant wilts 
on bright, hot days. Causes: Club root; root 
knot nematodes; cabbage maggots. If you sus­
pect any of these pests, pull up a plant and 
examine the roots. Roots that are enlarged 
and clublike indicate club root, a fungal dis­
ease: remove and destroy diseased plants. Pre­
vent problems by rotating crops and improving 
drainage. Add lime to raise the pH to 7.2 or 
above. Cabbage can tolerate this pH. but club 
root fungi are less active.
Cabbage roots covered with irregularly 
shaped galls are infested with root knot
nematodes. Destroy severely infested plants. 
Reduce the number of nematodes in the soil 
by solarizing soil, keeping area clear of crops 
and weeds for a summer, or by planting a winter 
cover crop of wheat. Applying parasitic nem­
atodes or chitin to the soil can also help con­
trol pest nematodes.
Cabbage roots riddled with slimy, wind­
ing tunnels are infested with cabbage maggots. 
Larvae are white, '/»" maggots that feed on 
roots and transmit bacterial and fungal diseases. 
Adults look somewhat like houseflies and lay 
eggs on the soil near the base of the plant. See 
page 53 for an illustration of this pest. Remove 
and destroy infested plants. Frequent, light 
cultivation when plants are young helps to de­
crease larval populations. Or plant each trans­
plant through an X-shaped slit in the center of 
a 6"-8" square of tar paper to prevent the 
adults from laying eggs near the stems. Solar­
izing the soil will help reduce maggot popula­
tions in problem areas.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted; stems 
twisted. Cause: Fusarium yellows. Leaves of 
afflicted plants drop off starting at the bottom 
and working up, often leaving a bare stem. 
Cut stems reveal darkened vascular tissue in 
afflicted areas. This fungal disease usually 
occurs soon after transplanting. See page 53 for 
an illustration of this disease. Destroy infected 
plants. Use at least a 5-year rotation to pre­
vent problems or plant resistant cultivars such 
as ‘Applause’, Bravo’, ‘Early Jersey Wakefield’, 
‘Gourmet’,‘Grand Slam Hybrid’, ‘Green Cup’, 
Market Prize’, ‘Market V ictor, Ranger’, ‘Red 
Danish’, and ‘Stonehead’.
Leaves curled and yellow; plant stunted. 
Cause: Aphids. Look for small, green, pink, 
gray, black, or white fluffy-coated, soft-bodied 
insects feeding on plants. Aphids can also 
transmit viral diseases. Control by knocking 
the pests off the plant with a blast of water, or 
use an insecticidal soap spray. Severe infesta­
tions can be controlled by spraying with neem 
or pyrethrin.

CABBAGE 
■ 
55
Leaves with yellow, V-shaped spots on 
margins. Cause: Black rot. As this bacterial 
disease progresses, yellow areas on the leaves 
enlarge and veins turn black. Infected leaves 
die and drop off. Stems have internal black 
streaks. Heads are dwarfed and often 1-sided. 
See page 53 for an illustration of this disease. 
Destroy infected plants. Spray copper if weather 
is wet and if you have had problems in the 
past. Resistant cultivars include ‘A & C #5'. 
‘Blue Boy', ‘Bravo’, ‘Fortuna', ‘Grand Slam 
Hybrid', and ‘Guardian’.
Leaves with yellow-brown, concentrically 
ringed spots. Cause: Alternaria blight. This 
fungal disease attacks lower leaves first. Spots 
merge and leaves die as the disease progresses. 
Plants eventually die. Spray plants with cop­
per at the first sign of symptoms. Plant toler­
ant cultivars such as Hybrid H' to prevent 
problems.
Leaves with white and yellow blotches.
Cause: Harlequin bugs. Leaves turn brown, 
wilt, and die in severe infestations. Look for 
flat, '/2,r long, shield-shaped stink bugs w'ith 
red and black, spotted markings. Nymphs look 
like adults but are smaller and more round. 
Handpick to control mild infestations, or spray 
with pyrethrin. Destroy crop residues after 
harvest to eliminate pests.
Leaves with pale spots, white growth on 
undersides. Cause: Downy mildew. Infected 
heads have dark patches on leaves. As the 
disease progresses, infected areas enlarge and 
turn tan and papery. See page 53 for an illustra­
tion of this fungal disease. Control by spraying 
plants with a baking-soda-and-soap spray (1 
teaspoon baking soda. 1 teaspoon liquid dish 
soap, 1 quart water) or copper. The cultivar 
‘Hybrid H* is tolerant of downy mildew.
Leaves with white-bronze spots. Cause: 
Thrips. Severe infestations cause leaves to wilt. 
These tiny insects look like grains of pepper. 
Trap with sticky blue traps or spray insectici­
dal soap, making sure to cover undersides of 
leaves where thrips feed.
Leaves with brown to gray spots; stem has 
sunken areas. Cause: Black leg. Leaf spots 
are speckled with tiny black dots. As the sunken 
areas on stem enlarge, they may girdle the 
plant and cause it to wilt and die. Dead leaves 
remain attached to the plant. See page 53 for an 
illustration of this disease. Spray plants, espe­
cially the stems, with copper at the first sign of 
this fungal disease. When spraying stems, try 
to avoid spraying copper on the soil, because 
it is toxic to many soil organisms, including 
earthworms. Prevent black leg by using a 4-year 
rotation and improving soil drainage.
Leaves with brown tips. Causes: Exces­
sive heat: calcium deficiency. Browning of 
the tips of outer leaves is caused by extreme 
heat. Cabbage is sensitive to bright sun and 
temperatures above 80°F Plant cultivars that 
resist tipburn such as ‘Hancock Hybrid’ and 
‘Multikeeper’.
Brown leaf tips inside the head are caused 
by calcium deficiency. Many factors contrib­
ute to poor calcium  uptake. To prevent 
problems, keep soil moisture constant and 
side-dress plants with compost to provide bal­
anced nutrition.
Leaves cracked and corky; stem water- 
soaked or hollow inside the head. Cause: Boron 
deficiency. Plants in the cabbage family need 
lots of boron. Spray plants with seaweed extract 
when transplanting and repeat several times 
until head formation to help prevent problems. 
Raise the boron level of the soil by adding 1 
tablespoon of borax dissolved in 1 gallon water, 
or 10 pounds of kelp, per 100 square feet.
Leaves riddled with small holes. Cause: 
Striped flea beetles. These small, shiny, black 
beetles hop when disturbed. They can trans­
mit viral and bacterial diseases. See page 53 for 
an illustration of this pest. Protect young plants 
with row' cover until they have at least 6 leaves. 
‘Early Jersey Wakefield’ tolerates beetle dam­
age better than most cultivars.
[.eaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Caterpillars. Look for dark green excrement

56 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
at the base of leaves or plant. Imported cab- 
bageworm is a velvety green, slow-moving cat­
erpillar up to 1 'A" long. Adults are small white 
butterflies. Cabbage loopers are light green, 
1 ‘/a" long caterpillars with a white stripe along 
each side. They travel with a characteristic 
"looping" movement, like an inchworm. Adults 
are gray moths. See page 53 for an illustration 
of these 2 pests. Diamondback moth caterpil­
lars are pale green with light brown heads, Vi*" 
long, pointed at both ends, and covered with 
fine black hairs. Adults are slender, Vj" long 
moths.
Apply a BTK spray as soon as active 
caterpillars or feeding are observed; remem­
ber to look inside heads for early signs of 
feeding. Fheromone traps are available for 
male cabbage looper moths; spray with BTK
1-2 weeks after the first moths are caught in 
the traps. Help reduce problems by planting 
cultivars, such as Danish Ballhead*, ‘Early 
Jersey Wakefield’, and ‘Red Ace’, that are less 
susceptible to cabbage looper and imported 
cabbageworm feeding.
These caterpillars are all parasitized by 
wasps, and other beneficials feed on both eggs 
and larvae. A native virus may also kill cater­
pillars later in the season. Infected caterpil­
lars move slowly, become yellow, and die. Let 
nature work for you and avoid handpicking or 
spraying if caterpillars are infected or covered 
with the small, white, spindle-shaped eggs of 
parasitic wasps.
Heads small and soft; color poor in red 
cabbage. Cause: Potassium deficiency. Check 
with a soil test and amend as needed.
Heads split. Cause: Excessive water. Keep 
soil constantly moist, but not saturated, espe­
cially when heads are forming.
Heads rot. Cause: Fungal diseases. A 
variety of fungi cause cabbage heads to rot. 
Destroy rotted plants. Spray plants with cop­
per before symptoms develop if you have had 
problems in the past.
Calendula
Calendula, pot marigold. Annuals.
Calendulas are herbs that have l"-3", 
orange or yellow flowers, giving bouquets of 
color for borders and indoor use. Plants grow 
1 -3' high with a bushy habit. Calendulas blend 
well into bedding schemes, herb gardens, and 
containers.
Sow seeds indoors 4-6 weeks before trans­
planting outdoors into warm spring soil. Direct- 
seed in early summer for color in late summer 
or fall. Plant seeds '/»" deep; they need dark­
ness to germinate. They should sprout in 1 
week. Thin seedlings to T.
For earliest color, transplant or seed in 
full sun. In hot climates plants appreciate some 
afternoon shade. While calendulas tolerate 
poor soil, they prefer average soil and must 
have good drainage. Water regularly, keeping 
soil slightly moist. When first buds appear, 
pinch back the main stem to promote maxi­
mum flowering. In adverse conditions, such 
as excess heat, calendulas may still flower, 
but stems will be shorter.
Problems
Leaves, steins, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. For controls, see “Leaves, stems, and 
buds distorted" on page 20.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Causes: 
Imported cabbageworms; slugs and snails. Cab- 
bageworms are green caterpillars with a yel­
low back stripe and yellow side spots. Handpick 
cabbageworms or spray leaves with BTK when 
pests first appear.
Slugs and snails cause similar damage, 
and leave behind slimy trails of mucus. For 
controls, see “Leaves with large, ragged holes" 
on page 18.
Leaves greenish yellow; growth poor.

CAMELLIA 
■ 
57
Cause: Aster yellows. For more information, 
see “Leaves greenish yellow: growth poor” on 
page 19.
Callistephus
China aster. Annuals.
Not true asters, China asters provide showy, 
single or double, daisylike blossoms from mid­
summer until autumn with successive plantings. 
There are early, mid-season, and late-flowering 
cultivars. A range of color choices is available, 
including blue, purple, pink, red, rose, yellow, 
or white. Individual flowers can reach 5" wide; 
petal types are quilled, spooned, or curled. 
Plant size varies from 9" to 24" high, with a 
possible IV2' spread. Low-growing cultivars 
make good edging plants. Taller cultivars are 
popular for long-lasting cut flowers. Plants 
will not rebloom once flowers have been cut.
Direct-sow outdoors a week or two after 
the last frost, barely covering the seed. Seeds 
germinate within 2 weeks. Or, for earlier flowers, 
sow seeds indoors 6-8 weeks before the last 
frost. Move seedlings to individual 3" pots 
when the first true leaves appear. Move plants 
outdoors when nights are consistently above 
50°E Handle carefully during transplanting 
to avoid damaging the roots. Space 6"-15" 
apart. Each plant blooms for about 4 weeks. 
Successive plantings 2 weeks apart are the key 
to a long display season.
China asters tolerate light shade only. They 
thrive in fertile, moist but well-drained soil in 
full sun. China asters are shallow-rooted, so 
cover soil with a 1" mulch to retain soil mois­
ture and keep roots cool. Pinch growing tips 
to promote bushiness. Water regularly so soil 
stays slightly moist. Uneven care that slows
growth makes the plant susceptible to dis­
ease. Remove old flowers. Tall cultivars may 
need staking to support heavy flowers on the 
slim stems.
Problems
Leaves greenish yellow; growth poor.
Cause: Aster yellows. For more information, 
see “Leaves greenish yellow; growth poor” on 
page 19.
Lower leaves yellow, wilt, and die. Cause: 
Fusarium wilt. Other symptoms of this com­
mon fungal disease include yellowing and wilt­
ing of I side of plant only; drooping flower 
heads; stunted mature plants; dark brown areas 
on stems; and partial or total root decay. Once 
introduced on diseased plants or transmitted 
by wind, water, or handling, Fusarium wilt 
lives on indefinitely in soil. There is no cure. 
Remove infected plants and dispose of them 
in sealed containers in household trash. Never 
plant China asters in the same location 2 years 
in a row. Wilt-resistant cultivars are available, 
but they are not completely immune.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. For control measures, see “Leaves, 
stems, and buds distorted” on page 20.
Camellia
Camellia. Shrubs and small trees.
Camellias are evergreen shrubs or small 
trees that bear spectacular flowers. They are 
popular as foundation plants or hedges in areas 
where they are hardy. In cold climates grow 
these plants in a cool greenhouse.
Camellias require a moist, peaty, acidic 
soil well-enriched with organic matter. Set out 
as bare-root plants in partial shade. A thick

58 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PI ANT GUIDE
layer of mulch will protect the shallow roots 
and help retain soil moisture.
Problems
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps" on page 237 for control suggestions.
Flowers turn brown and fall off. Cause: 
Flower blight. This soilborne fungus causes 
small brown spots that expand to cover entire 
petals. Prevent problems by setting out only 
bare-root plants and picking off all blooms as 
they fade. If the disease does strike, remove 
and destroy all the flowers. Use a preventive 
spray of bordeaux mix in the spring. Surround 
plants with a 3” layer of mulch to keep spores 
from splashing up from the soil to the flowers.
Leaves with notched edges. Cause: Fuller 
rose beetles. The adult is a */»", grayish brown 
beetle with a cream-colored stripe on each 
side of its body. It feeds at night on foliage. 
The yellowish, brown-headed larvae feed on 
plant roots. Handpick adults as they hide in 
foliage during the day. Place sticky barriers, 
such as Tanglefoot, around the base of plants 
to keep adults from climbing up to the leaves. 
Drench soil around the plant with a solution 
of parasitic nematodes to control larvae.
Campanula
Bellflower, harebell. Perennials.
The profuse dainty, blue, purple, or white, 
bell-shaped flowers of Campanula spp. brighten 
gardens from spring through summer. This 
large genus includes annual, biennial, and 
perennial species that range in size from low- 
growing Carpathian harebells (C. carpatica)
to 2 -3 ' tall, peach-leaved bellflowers (C. 
persicifolia).
Mountain natives, bellflowers prefer full 
sun to light shade; well-drained, organic soil; 
and regular watering. Serbian bellflower. C. 
poseharskyana. tolerates drought, but most 
other bellflowers do not. A layer of mulch 
helps keep the root zone cool and holds in 
moisture during hot summer weather: a win­
ter mulch protects roots from heaving. Divide 
plants in spring every 3-4 years.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. See 
“Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects" on page 177 for 
controls.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. For controls, see “Leaves 
with large, ragged holes" on page 177.
Leaves and flowers distorted and with brown 
spots. Cause: Thrips. The same thrips that 
feed on onions feed on bellflowers. Damage 
to young plants is most severe. Water stress 
encourages thrips multiplication and damage. 
These '/ s o "- 1/ * * ",  yellow, brown, or black pests 
are difficult to see with the naked eye, but the 
streaking, spotting, and distortion caused by a 
heavy thrips infestation is distinctive. Protect 
plants from thrips damage with predatory 
mites and blue or yellow sticky traps: in severe 
cases apply sprays of alcohol, insecticidal soap, 
neem, or pyrethrin, or dust the undersides of 
leaves and the surrounding soil with diatoma- 
ceous earth.
Leaves yellow and wilting; stems black­
ened at base; plant topples over. Cause: Stem, 
root, and crown rots. These problems are com­
mon when bellflowers are kept overly wet or 
are grown in poorly drained soil. The base of 
an infected plant may show grayish white mold: 
dark lesions blacken the stem from the soil 
up. eventually girdling the plant. Remove and

CARPINLS 
■ 
59
destroy infected plants and surrounding soil. 
Let soil dry somewhat between waterings, and 
incorporate organic matter to improve soil 
drainage. Avoid overwatering and overcrowd­
ing; keep winter mulch away from the crowns 
to prevent excess moisture. Protect crowns 
from injury, especially when plants are dor­
mant and hard to see. Wash tools after work­
ing around infected plants.
Caiina
Canna. Rhizomes.
Cannas large, paddle-shaped leaves and 
brighdy colored red, yellow, orange, pink, white, 
or variegated flowers add a tropical look to 
summer and fall gardens. These heat-loving 
hybrids (Canna X  generalis) grow 1VV-8' tall 
with a spread of about 3'.
In Zones 8-10 cannas will survive winter 
temperatures, but in northern zones, the rhi­
zomes are overwintered indoors. In either case, 
plant rhizomes 3"-5" deep and 1' apart in 
average, moist but well-drained soil in full 
sun. Both shade and excess nitrogen fertilizer 
can reduce bloom. In cold winter areas, start 
rhizomes indoors in pots as early as February. 
Move outdoors in spring. If necessary, divide 
roots at spring planting time. Use a sharp 
knife, and leave at least 1 good-size bud on an 
ample piece of rhizome. Let divisions dry over­
night before planting. To overwinter, carefully 
dig up the rhizomes in fall after frost blackens 
the leaves. Allow them to dry for a few days, 
then store them in containers of barely moist 
sand or perlite in a cool place.
Problems
Leaves and/or flowers with holes. Cause: 
Japanese beetles. See “Leaves and/or flowers
with holes’* on page 50 for controls.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. For control information, see 
“Leaves with large, ragged holes" on page 50.
Leaves rolled. Cause: Leafrollers. These 
pests roll leaves into tubes and fasten them 
with webbing while feeding. Handpick and 
destroy rolled leaves: encourage parasitic Trich- 
ogramma wasps. Sprays of BTK are most effec­
tive when pests are young.
Cantaloupe
Cucumis rnelo 
Reticulatus group (Cucurbitaceae)
Cantaloupe is a name commonly used 
for muskmelons in the United States. See the 
Melon entry beginning on page 148 for cul­
ture and pest information. Harvest when fruit 
smells ripe and the stem separates easily from 
the vine.
Carpinus
Hornbeam. Trees.
Hornbeam s are bushy, slow-growing, 
alternate-leaved trees. They are occasionally 
used as specimen trees, but difficulty in trans­
planting limits their use.
Set out balled-and-burlapped plants in 
early spring. Hornbeams are excellent urban 
trees and, while preferring full sun, will grow 
satisfactorily in partial shade. They are widely 
tolerant of various soil types.
Co

60 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUDE
H ornbeam s are rem arkably free of 
problems. Maple phenacoccus scale may 
detract from the appearance of the plant, coat­
ing the undersides of leaves with fluffy white 
egg masses. See "Leaves yellow; whole plant 
weakened" on page 13. Leafminers may also 
attack; see “Leaves tunneled" on page 237.
Carrot
Dauciis carota var. sativus (Umbelliferae)
Carrots are a biennial vegetable grown 
for their crisp, sweet roots. They are a cool- 
season crop, hardy enough to be undisturbed 
by light frosts in the spring and fall.
Culture
Carrots grow best in deeply worked, loose 
soils with a pH between 5.5 and 6.8. No other 
vegetable is as sensitive to poor soil structure. 
Misshapen carrots are more often a result of 
lumpy or compacted soil than any pest prob­
lem. Carrots do well in raised beds. Work in a 
generous amount of compost or well-rotted 
manure before planting. Cultivars with short 
roots will tolerate shallow or poor soil better 
than long, thin cultivars.
Carrots grow best when temperatures are 
between 60° and 70°E They grow poorly above 
75°F but will tolerate temperatures as low as 
45°E Most cultivars grow short roots at high 
temperatures, and longer, more pointed roots 
at lower temperatures.
Abundant water is necessary for good 
root development. It is especially important 
to give emerging seedlings an edge against 
weeds. Keep soil evenly moist, but not saturated.
To prevent problems with diseases and 
insects, do not plant carrots where carrots or 
parsley has grown for 3 years.
Carrots require moderate to high levels 
of potassium and phosphorus, but only mod­
erate levels of nitrogen, so avoid high-nitrogen 
fertilizers. Carrots are very sensitive to salt 
injury and do poorly in soils with high so­
dium levels.
Leaf Problems
Young leaves yellow and dwarfed; growth 
bushy. Cause: Aster yellows. Older leaves of 
plants infected with this disease may be purplish. 
Once a plant is infected, there is no cure; 
destroy infected plants. The disease is spread 
by green or brown, wedge-shaped ‘/
i o ' - V
s " long 
leafhoppers. Cover emerging seedlings with 
row cover if leafhoppers have been a problem. 
Control leafhoppers by spraying plants with 
insecticidal soap in the evening, or for severe 
infestations, with a commercial neem or pyre­
thrin spray.
Leaves yellow and curled or distorted. 
Causes: Aphids: tarnished plant bugs. Aphids 
are small, soft-bodied, green, black, gray, pink, 
or white fluffy-coated insects that suck plant 
sap. For a mild infestation, knock pests off 
plants with a blast of water. Control them by 
spraying plants with insecticidal soap or with 
a commercial neem or pyrethrin spray if infes­
tation is severe.
Tarnished plant bugs are oval, light green 
to brown. '/*" long bugs with a lighter triangle 
on each wing. Nymphs are smaller, yellow- 
green insects with black spots. Control them 
with white sticky traps or by spraying or dust­
ing plants with pyrethrin in the evening. Turn 
crop residues under after harvest to reduce 
future problems.
Leaves yellow; plant wilts during bright, 
hot days but recovers at night. Cause: Root 
knot nematodes. See “Roots misshapen and 
covered with numerous hairlike roots" below 
for controls.
O ld er leaves yellow ; plant stu n ted . 
Causes: Nitrogen deficiency; waterlogged soil. 
Spray foliage and drench roots with fish emul­

CARROT 
■ 
61
sion or fish-meal tea to alleviate symptoms. 
Plant carrots in well-drained soil. Keep soil 
evenly moist, but not saturated.
Leaves with dark, yellow-bordered spots. 
Causes: Cercospora leaf blight: Altemaria leaf 
blight; bacterial leaf blight. For the fungal 
blights, pick off spotted leaves and spray foliage 
with fish emulsion to encourage new growth. 
If disease continues to spread, spray foliage 
with sulfur. To prevent problems, soak seed in 
122°F water for 20 minutes before planting. 
(Be aware that this treatment can damage 
seed viability; for complete instructions, see 
page 422.) Plant cultivars. such as ‘Huron, 
‘Orlando Gold Hybrid*, and ‘Seminole’, that 
are somewhat resistant to Alternaria.
Bacterial blight also causes dark brown 
streaks on petioles. Destroy the whole plant. 
Spray plants with copper if bacterial blight 
has been a problem in the past. To prevent 
problems, soak seed in 122°F water for 20 
minutes before planting.
Root Problems
Roots forked and misshapen. Cause: 
Lumpy or compacted soil. Prevent problems 
by working soil deeply and adding lots of 
compost. Plant shorter-rooted cultivars in rocky 
or clay soil.
Roots misshapen and covered with numer­
ous hairlike roots. Causes: Root knot nema­
todes; aster yellows. Root knot nematodes 
cause tiny round swellings on side roots. Pre­
vent future root knot nematode problems by 
applying chitin or parasitic nematodes to the 
soil before planting.
Roots infected with the disease aster yel­
lows are small, woody, hairy, and taste bitter. 
See ‘‘Young leaves yellow and dwarfed; growth 
bushy*' above for controls.
Roots with green shoulders. Cause: Light 
exposure. Keep carrots covered with 2" of soil 
to prevent problems.
Roots with dark tunnels. Causes: Car­
rot weevils: carrot rust flies; carrot beetles.
Carrot weevils usually attack the upper and 
outer parts of the root. Tunnels are often in a 
zigzag pattern. Larvae are creamy white. ‘A" 
long grubs with brown heads. Adults are cop­
pery brown, %" long snout beetles. Destroy 
infested roots; don't put them in the compost. 
Control larvae by applying parasitic nema­
todes to the soil. Control adults, which emerge 
early in the spring to lay eggs, by covering the 
seedbed with row cover or by spraying or 
dusting plants with pyrethrin as soon as you 
see adult weevils.
Carrot rust fly maggots feed throughout 
the root, leaving randomly patterned tunnels 
filled with a rust-colored, sawdustlike material. 
Larvae are ‘A" long, white maggots. Adults are 
small flies with yellow heads. Apply parasitic 
nematodes to soil to control larvae. Prevent 
problems by planting after June 1st to avoid 
the first hatching of the season. Cover seed­
bed with row cover to prevent adults from 
laying eggs on soil.
Carrot beetle larvae are 1", bluish white 
grubs that feed on the roots. Adults are Vj ", 
reddish brown or black beetles. Fall cultivation 
reduces overwintering populations; crop rota­
tion will also help.
Roots with small, irregular holes; plant 
may be stunted and yellow. Cause: Wireworms. 
Damage usually occurs later in the season and 
is worse in dry years. Larvae are up to IV2" 
long, yellow to reddish brown, slender, tough­
bodied, segmented grubs with brown heads. 
Adults are ‘A"-3A" long, dark-colored, elon­
gated click beetles. Control wireworms by apply­
ing parasitic nematodes to the soil.
Roots or crowns rotted. Cause: Vari­
ous fungal or bacterial diseases. Root rot is 
often brought on by soggy, poorly drained soil 
or previous insect damage to the roots. Plant 
carrots in loose, well-drained soil and keep 
soil moist, but not soggy. Use raised beds to 
improve drainage.
Roots with internal cavities; may split open. 
Cause: Cavity spot. This condition is caused

62 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GL IDE
by a combination of factors: calcium deficiency, 
high levels of potassium, and possibly various 
diseases. To prevent problems, keep soil moist, 
but not soggy. Add gypsum, or high-calcium 
lime if pH is below 6.2, to raise calcium level, 
and withhold high-potassium fertilizer.
Roots with jagged cracks. Causes: Freez­
ing injury: uneven soil moisture; cavity spot. 
Temperatures below 30°Fcause cracked roots 
with a water-soaked appearance. Protect roots 
with mulch before temperatures fall.
Roots can also crack if soil is wetted after 
being dry. Prevent problems by keeping soil 
evenly moist.
Severe cases of cavity spot can cause 
open cracks. See "Roots with internal cavi­
ties; may split open" on page 61 for causes 
and controls.
Roots poorly formed or pale. Causes: 
Nutrient deficiency; extreme temperatures. 
Spindly, short roots can be caused by potas­
sium deficiency or excessive heat. Poor color 
and taste are caused by magnesium deficiency, 
phosphorus deficiency, and low or high 
temperatures. Copper deficiency can also cause 
poor root development. Spray foliage with 
seaweed extract to prevent deficiencies. Do a 
soil test and amend soil as needed.
Cauliflower
Brassica oleracea 
Botrytis group (Cruciferae)
Cauliflower is a cool-season crop grown 
for its dense, white heads of flower buds. Cau­
liflower and cabbage require similar culture 
and are attacked by many of the same diseases 
and insects. See the Cabbage entry beginning 
on page 52 for culture and more information 
on problems. Prevent problems by planting
the following cultivars: ‘Alpha Paloma’ and 
White Rock' are tolerant of cabbage root mag­
gots; ‘Super Snowball A tolerates flea beetles 
better than most cultivars.
Cauliflower is more fussy about tempera­
tures than the other brassicas. Plants will only 
tolerate a low of 45°F and grow poorly above 
75°E Transplants exposed to cool tempera­
tures (35°-45°F) for 10 days or more may 
form tiny, unusable flower heads. High tem­
peratures can cause the same problem. Its 
optimum temperature range is 60°-65°E
Problems
Heads with black spots on surface. Cause: 
Downy mildew. Control this fungal disease by 
spraying plants with a baking-soda-and-soap 
spray (1 teaspoon baking soda, 1 teaspoon 
liquid dish soap, 1 quart water) or copper at 
the first sign of disease. Repeat weekly if weather 
is wet. Prevent problems by planting ‘Cloud 
Nine, which is somewhat tolerant of downy 
mildew.
Heads with brown or discolored curds.
Causes: Light exposure; boron deficiency: cold 
injury. Cauliflower heads develop green or 
purple pigments when exposed to sunlight. To 
blanch cauliflower, tie the outside leaves loosely 
up over developing heads so that air can move 
through, but water cannot drip in. Save time 
by growing self-blanching cultivars such as 
‘Montano’.
Boron deficiency turns curds brown and 
makes them appear water-soaked. Prevent prob­
lems by spraying plants with seaweed extract 
when transplanted and every 2 weeks thereafter. 
Raise the boron level of the soil by adding 1 
tablespoon of borax dissolved in 1 gallon water, 
or 10 pounds of kelp, per 100 square feet.
Curds will also turn brown in response to 
cold and freezing injury. Protect cauliflower 
heads with row cover below 45°F
Heads with loose or irregular flower curds. 
Causes: Excessive heat; molybdenum defi­

CELERY ■ 
63
ciency. If weather has been hot, suspect heat 
stress. Prevent problems by growing cauliflower 
as a fall crop when temperatures are cooler. 
Prevent molybdenum deficiency by spraying 
plants with seaweed extract at transplanting 
and every few weeks thereafter.
Cedrus
Cedar. Trees.
Cedars are among the most attractive 
evergreen trees. They have horizontal branch­
ing habits and bear large, upright cones. All 
are ideal as specimen trees.
Cedars all like a deep, loamy soil, well- 
drained but enriched with organic matter. Plant 
them in spring as small, balled-and-burlapped 
or container-grown plants, setting them in a 
sunny location. Cedars are remarkably free of 
serious insect pests. Keep your trees healthy 
by applying compost mulch and watering thor­
oughly during periods of drought to minimize 
damage.
Problems
Leaves reddish brown; branch tips die back.
Cause: Deodar weevils. This xh" long, red­
dish brown beetle has irregular white spots on 
its back. It will occasionally gnaw through 
bark and feed on the growing tissue beneath, 
girdling small branches. The grubs also feed 
on branch tips. This pest rarely attacks healthy 
trees, so fertilize and water trees regularly to 
keep them vigorous. Drench soil around the 
plant with a solution of parasitic nematodes. 
Spray leaves with pyrethrin to control severe 
infestations.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
‘Trunk or branches with oozing lesions: branch 
tips die back" on page 238 for more information.
Leaves yellow and wilt. Cause: Root rot. 
See “Leaves yellow and wilt" on page 237 
for details.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps" on page 237 for controls.
Celastrus
Bittersweet. Vines.
Bittersweets are vigorous twining vines 
with alternate leaves. The orange-red berries 
are popular for dried arrangements.
Bittersweets flourish in sun or partial shade 
in virtually any soil. Be sure to obtain both 
male and female plants to ensure fruiting. 
Control the aggressive vines by pruning them 
back severely each winter.
The major insect enemy of bittersweets 
is scales; see “Leaves yellow: stems and leaves 
covered with small bumps" on page 237. Pow­
dery mildew may affect leaves; see “Leaves 
with powdery white coating" on page 237.
Celery
Apium graveolens vac dulce 
(Umbelliferae)
Celery is a biennial vegetable grown for 
its crispy leaf stalks. It is in the same family as 
carrots and is troubled by many of the same 
pests and diseases. See the Carrot entry begin­
Copyright

64 ■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
ning on page 60 for more information on culture 
and problems.
Celery does well if given plenty of mois­
ture, rich soil with a pH between 6.0 and 6.8, 
and cool temperatures or light shade. Celery 
will withstand a light frost, but will bolt or 
flower prematurely and produce only a few 
small stalks if temperatures are below 55°F 
for more than 10 days when plants are young.
Celery is a heavy feeder. Boron deficiency 
causes brown, mottled leaves and horizontal 
cracks on stalks. ‘Florida 683’ is tolerant of 
low boron. Calcium deficiency causes the cen­
ter of the plant to blacken and die. ‘Utah 
52-70R Improved' is tolerant of low calcium. 
Magnesium deficiency causes yellow leaves. 
Discolored streaks on stalks are a symptom of 
potassium deficiency. Phosphorus deficiency 
causes plants to form rosettes. Prevent prob­
lems by adding plenty of compost to the soil 
and by spraying plants with seaweed extract 
every 2 weeks. Check suspected deficiencies 
with soil tests and amend soil as needed.
Stalks become tough, bitter, and stringy 
if plants do not have enough water or nutrients, 
if temperatures are too high, or if they are not 
harvested promptly.
Problems
Leaves with dark, yellow-bordered spots.
Cause: Blight diseases. Various fungal blight 
diseases attack celery. Stalks of afflicted plants 
may also develop spots or dark areas. Des­
troy spotted leaves. Spray plants with copper 
if symptoms are serious. Soak seed in 118°F 
water for 30 minutes before planting to pre­
vent problems. (Be aware that this treatment 
can damage seed viability; for complete 
instructions, see page 422.) Plant cultivars, 
such as ‘Emerson Pascal’ and 'Golden Self- 
Blanching’, that tolerate certain blights.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted; veins in 
stalks reddish. Cause: Fusarium yellows.
Destroy plants with this fungal disease. Pre­
vent problems by planting tolerant cultivars 
such as ‘Bishop', ‘Deacon’, ‘Emerson Pascal’, 
Starlet’, ‘Summit’, Ventura1, and ‘Vicar’.
Leaves yellow and mottled; stalks twisted; 
plant dwarfed. Cause: Celery mosaic. Destroy 
infected plants. Control aphids because they 
can spread viral diseases as they feed. Prevent 
problems by planting resistant cultivars such 
as “Florida 683’ and ‘Utah -52-70R Improved’.
Leaves and stalks with irregular tan spots. 
Cause: Brown spot. Control this fungal dis­
ease by spraying plants with bordeaux mix 
when spots appear to prevent further spread.
Leaves with chewed holes or rolled edges. 
Cause: Caterpillars. Handpick caterpillars or 
spray plants with BTK to control.
Stalks or crowns rotted. Cause: Bacte­
rial and fungal diseases. Various bacteria and 
fungi will rot celery stalks and crowns. Destroy 
infected plants. Spray remaining plants with 
copper. Prevent problems by controlling insect 
pests, such as carrot rust flies, that injure roots, 
creating openings for disease organisms. Also, 
avoid handling plants while they are wet, and 
plant in raised beds if possible.
Celosia
Celosia, cockscomb. Annuals.
Celosias form feathery plumes or velvety 
crests in shades of pink, red, orange, and yellow. 
Blossoms appear in summer through late fall; 
plants grow 7'-36" tall. Plumed types are great 
in beds and borders; crested types are ideal 
for the cutting garden.
Give celosias a sunny, well-drained site. 
Plants tolerate drought and poor soils, but

CHAENOMELES ■ 
65
they bloom poorly and become leggy if shaded. 
Sow seeds indoors 4 weeks before last frost, or 
direct-seed outdoors after the soil warms up. 
Cover lightly so seeds receive some light but 
don’t dry out. Tall-growing, crested types are 
often top-heavy and benefit from staking.
Celosias are usually trouble-free. Care­
less transplanting can injure the terminal bud 
and reduce flowering. Damping-off may cause 
seedlings to rot at the soil line; see “Seedlings 
die’’ on page 20 for controls.
Centaurea
Cornflower, bachelor’s-button. Annuals.
Usually seen in shades of blue, hardy 
cornflowers, or bachelor's-buttons, are available 
in red, pink, white, and violet, too. These 
12'-26" high garden favorites provide 1" flow­
ers all spring. Seeds are favored by birds, par­
ticularly finches. Use in beds and borders or 
for cutting.
Direct-sow outdoors in early spring where 
growing seasons are short, and in later sum­
mer through fall where winters are mild. Indoor 
seeding in April is an option, but seedlings 
transplant poorly. Sow evenly to avoid over­
crowding, which results in weak flower stalks 
and slow growth. Seedlings appear in 2 weeks. 
Thin to 6"-9" apart.
For best results, give bachelor’s-buttons 
full sun and rich, moist, neutral soil. They 
will, however, tolerate average soil and drought. 
Always water early in the day to give the leaves 
a chance to dry before nightfall. Add organic 
matter or fertilizer to the planting site before 
seeding, and do not fertilize again; extra fertil­
izer promotes the development of leaves rather
than flowers. By midsummer, bachelor’s-buttons 
tend to become woody and unsightly. Picking 
flowers prolongs bloom until July, but plan on 
pulling out the spent plants and replacing them 
with a later-blooming annual, such as mari­
golds or celosias.
Bachelor’s-buttons have very few prob­
lems or pests. They may reseed too prolifi- 
cally for some gardeners, but removing spent 
flowers decreases this possibility. If plants look 
too leggy, they are not getting enough sun; 
plant on a sunnier site next year. Rusts may 
cause orange spots on leaves; see “Stems and 
leaf undersides with dusty, dark brown spots” 
on page 21. Aster yellows can cause plants to 
turn yellow; see "Leaves greenish yellow; growth 
poor’’ on page 19.
Chaenomeles
Flowering quince. Shrubs.
Flowering quinces are spring-blooming 
deciduous shrubs with alternate leaves and 
thorny branches. The plants are used as decid­
uous hedges, in foundation plantings, or in 
shrub borders.
Flowering quinces require full or nearly 
full sun. While not particular as to soils, they 
prefer a good, well-drained loam. Renewal 
pruning (removal of a few of the oldest canes 
each year) is recommended to keep them flow­
ering freely.
Aphids may feed on young shoots and 
leaves; see “Leaves wrinkled and discolored” 
on page 235. Scales may also be a problem; 
see “Leaves yellow; stem and leaves covered 
with small bumps” on page 237.

66 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PI ANT GUDE
Chard
Beta vulgaris. Cicla group (Chenopodiaceae)
Chard, also known as Swiss chard, is a 
type of beet grown for its succulent tops. It 
does not form enlarged roots. Green and red 
cultivars are available.
Chard grows vigorously from late spring 
to fall frost. Plants prefer sandy, well-drained 
soil with a pH of 6.5-7.5. They will tolerate a 
wide range of temperatures and will withstand 
light frost. To keep leaves tender, provide chard 
with plenty of water and nitrogen. Compost 
worked into the soil at planting followed by 
alfalfa meal sprinkled on the soil surface after 
seeding usually provides chard's requirements.
Chard and beets are susceptible to the 
same diseases and pests. See the Beet entry 
beginning on page 37 for descriptions and 
controls.
Cherry
Primus spp. ( Rosaceae)
Cherries are deciduous trees growing to 
35' for standard-size sweet cherries (Primus 
avium) and to 20' for standard-size sour cher­
ries (/? cerasus). These plants are hardy in 
Zones 4-9.
Culture
Cherries need full sun and, especially for 
sweet cherries, well-drained soil. Choose a 
site free of late spring frosts. Train sweet cher­
ries to a central leader form and sour cherries 
to an open center form. For more pruning 
information, see “Pruning and Training" on 
page 101.
Mature sweet cherries need little or no 
annual pruning. Sour cherries need enough 
pruning each winter to thin out branches and 
stimulate a moderate amount of growth.
To set fruit, most sweet cherries need 
cross-pollination from a second compatible 
cultivar planted nearby. Some sweet cherry 
cultivars need specific cultivars for cross- 
pollination. A few sweet cherries, such as Gar­
den Bing' and ‘Stella’, are self-pollinating. Sour 
cherries are self-pollinating. For more infor­
mation, see “Setting Fruit" on page 101.
Fruit Problems
Fruit malformed, shrunken, and drops 
early. Causes: Plum curculio larvae; cherry 
fruit fly maggots. Check affected fruit for 
crescent-shaped scars and small, brown-headed 
grubs inside. These are larvae of plum curcu­
lio beetles common to the East. The crescent­
shaped scar marks the site where these pests 
lay eggs. To control curculios without sprays, 
spread a dropcloth beneath the tree and jar 
the trunk and branches twice a day with a 
padded mallet. Collect and destroy curculios 
that fall onto the sheet. For more information 
see “Young fruit with crescent-shaped scars" 
on page 186.
Creamy white, '//' maggots inside fruit 
are the larvae of cherry fruit flies. These flies, 
which are half the size of houseflies, emerge 
in late spring from soilborne pupae and lay 
eggs in fruit. Eggs hatch into fruit-feeding 
maggots that later drop to the ground to pupate 
until next spring. To control this pest, trap 
adult flies in beginning to late May using red 
sticky spheres just like those for apple maggots.
For instructions on making apple maggot traps 
see "Fruit dimpled; brown tunnels through 
flesh" on page 22. Collect and destroy dropped 
fruit daily. See the opposite page for an illus­
tration of this pest.
Fruit with small brown spots that enlarge 
and become fuzzy in humid weather. Cause: 
Brown rot. This fungal disease may also cause
Copyrighted material

CHERRY 
■ 
67
Leaves with purple spots.
Cause: Cherry leaf spot.
Leaves turn yellow 
and drop: fruit ripens 
unevenly and may 
/ j  u 
be spotted.
Adult
Fruit with small brown spots /  
that enlarge and become 
fuzzy in humid weather.
• Cause: Brown rot. Young twigs 
brown and decaying.
Fruit malformed, s 
and drops early.
Cause: Cherry fruit fi 
Larvae feed near the 
ripening cherries.
blossoms to turn brown and decay. Infected 
cherries may drop early, or remain on the tree 
as dried, shriveled fruit known as mummies. 
To control brown rot. inspect trees in early 
spring. Remove and destroy both mummified 
fruit and twigs with gummy-looking lesions. 
For further control, spray sulfur early in the 
season to control the disease on blossoms, 
then again later in the season to protect fruit. 
Copper sprays also aid control. Since injured 
fruit is more susceptible to brown rot, control 
fruit-damaging insects, such as plum curculios. 
See above for an illustration of this disease.
Leaf and Branch Problems
New leaves twisted or curled and covered 
with a sticky coating. Cause: Black cherry 
aphids. Look on leaf undersides for clusters of 
these tiny black insects. The sticky coating is 
honeydew secreted by these pests. Leaves also 
may be covered with a black fungus, called 
sooty mold, which feeds on honeydew. Aphids
leave by midsummer, so if an infestation isn't 
severe, just wait it out.
For heavy infestations, knock aphids off 
with a strong spray of water. Or try insectici­
dal soap spray, which kills aphids on contact. 
Pyrethrin also kills aphids, but reserve this as 
a last resort since it also kills beneficial insects. 
Apply dormant oil spray in the winter to suffo­
cate aphid eggs.
Many natural predators keep aphids in 
check, including parasitic wasps, lady beetles, 
and hover flies. To attract aphid predators, 
grow nectar-producing flowers, such as dill 
and buckwheat, near your trees, or spray com­
mercial or homemade yeast-and-sugar mix­
tures on your trees. Introduced lacewings often 
control aphids. Buy these at commercial insec­
taries or from organic farm supply companies. 
Ants often introduce an aphid infestation: trap 
ants with sticky barriers around the trunks. 
Avoid excessive use of high-nitrogen fertilizer, 
which favors aphid reproduction.

68 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GLIDE
Leaves covered with lacy, brownish patches.
Cause: Pear slugs. These green-black, slimy 
creatures are not true slugs: they're the larvae 
of the pear sawfly, a black-and-yellow insect 
slightly larger than a housefly. In the spring 
sawflies emerge from soilborne cocoons and 
lay eggs on leaves. Eggs hatch into sluglike 
larvae that skeletonize leaves. Remove them 
by handpicking or with blasts of water. For 
heavy infestations, use insecticidal soap spray; 
for a dwarf tree, apply wood ashes or diatoma- 
ceous earth. (Caution: Wood ashes may dam­
age leaf tissue.) Spider mites multiply quickly 
in dry. dusty conditions, so wash ashes off 
after a few days to avoid encouraging a rise in 
the spider mite population.
Growing shoots wilt and die. Cause: Ori­
ental fruit moth larvae. Slit the stem below 
the wilted portion and look for a pinkish white. 
Vi" caterpillar—the larva of an oriental fruit 
moth. Larvae tunnel into shoots and remain 
for 2 weeks before leaving to pupate for 10 
days in cocoons suspended in trees. Larvae 
from later generations bore into and ruin fruit. 
Use pheromone traps to monitor and control 
the pests. Mating disruption pheromones. such 
as Isomate-M. are also effective. Replace them 
every 90 days throughout the growing season. 
For heavy infestations, spray superior oil to 
smother eggs and larvae.
Leaves with purple spots. Cause: Cherry 
leaf spot. This fungal disease, prevalent dur­
ing rainy springs in the East and Midwest, 
causes circular purple leaf spots that later 
turn brown and drop out leaving small holes. 
Leaves may yellow and drop early. Infected 
trees decline in fruit production and winter 
hardiness. Since the disease overwinters in 
fallen leaves, control it by thoroughly remov­
ing leaves before spring growth begins. For 
persistent infection, apply lime-sulfur or sul­
fur spray. Since lime-sulfur discolors fruit, use 
it only at petal fall, then use sulfur alone for 
subsequent sprays. Plant leaf spot-resistant 
cultivars including ‘Meteor* and ‘Northstar'
sour cherries and ‘Gold', ‘Lambert’, ‘Hedel- 
fingen*, ‘Schmidt Bigarreau’, and ‘Viva’ sweet 
cherries. See page 67 for an illustration of 
this disease.
Leaves covered with a white powdery 
coating. Cause: Powdery mildew. Leaves may 
also be twisted or stunted and a powdery coat­
ing may cover fruit. Rainy weather does not 
cause this fungal disease to spread. It is most 
common in weather patterns featuring cool 
nights changing to warm days. For control, 
apply sulfur or lime-sulfur spray. ‘Northstar’ 
sour cherry is resistant to powdery mildew.
Young twigs brown and decaying. Cause: 
Brown rot. With this fungal disease, limbs 
may develop gummy-looking lesions. For more 
information, see “Fruit with small brown spots 
that enlarge and become fuzzy in humid 
weather" on page 66.
Leaves wilting and dying on whole branches. 
Causes: Bactcrial canker; Valsa canker; shot- 
hole borers. With both cankers, trees may not 
leaf out in the spring, and branches may develop 
sunken, elliptical lesions that ooze a reddish 
gum. With bacterial canker, this gum smells 
sour, and leaves may have small, angular spots. 
For both cankers, prune wilted or dying 
branches off below the infection point, steri­
lizing tools in isopropyl alcohol or a 10 per­
cent bleach solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts 
water) between cuts. Valsa canker enters trees 
through bark injuries; prevent it with cultural 
practices that avoid bark injury. Cultivars 
resistant to bacterial canker include ‘Bada’, 
‘Corum', ‘Early Buriat', ‘Sam', and ‘Sue' sweet 
cherries. For more information, see “Branches 
wilting and dying, fail to leaf out in spring*' on 
page 167.
Dying branches covered with numerous 
small holes are the work of tiny beetles called 
shothole borers. Inside the sawdust-filled 
tunnels, look for white, V*" borer larvae with 
reddish brown heads. Shothole borers prefer 
injured or diseased trees. Vigorous, healthy 
trees are much less susceptible to problems.

CHESTNUT ■ 
69
Leaves yellowing; limb dieback. Cause: 
San Jose scale. Colonies of these sucking in­
sects cling to the bark and appear as small 
gray bumps that can easily be scraped off with 
a fingernail. Control San Jose scale with dor­
mant oil spray applied in late winter or early 
spring just before blossoms open.
Twigs and branches bearing tarry, black 
galls. Cause: Black knot. For more informa­
tion, see "Twigs and branches bearing tarry, 
black galls" on page 187.
Whole Plant Problems
Tree lacking vigor. Cause: Peachtree 
borers. The larvae of a clear-winged moth, 
these 1", white borers create holes and a gummy 
exudate on trunks near or just below ground 
level. Either dig the borers out without dam­
aging the tree excessively or locale borer holes 
and kill larvae by inserting a wire into holes. 
Cultivating shallowly around the base of the 
tree discourages these pests. Keeping your 
tree vigorous and avoiding mechanical dam­
age also discourages peachtree borers.
Tree stripped of fruit. Cause: Birds. Birds 
especially love red sweet cherries. Plant yellow- 
fruited cultivars. which are somewhat less attrac­
tive to birds. Cover small trees with netting. 
For more information on controlling birds, 
see “Stopping Animal Pests" on page 408.
Chestnut
Castiuiea spp. ( Fagaceae)
Chestnuts are deciduous trees with large, 
alternate leaves. The nuts are enclosed in prickly 
burrs, a drawback to the use of the trees for 
ornamental purposes.
At one time. American chestnut (Casta-
nea dentata) was the dominant tree in eastern 
forests. It was a splendid specimen tree, highly 
valued for its wood and for the nuts it yielded. 
Unfortunately, the fungus that causes chest­
nut blight was introduced to the United States 
in the early 1900s. and virtually all American 
chestnuts have died back from the disease. 
Infected trees sometimes produce new sprouts, 
but they don't grow to maturity. Using these 
sprouts, researchers are working to develop 
resistant strains. Until then, blight-resistant 
species, such as Japanese chestnut (C. crenata) 
and Chinese chestnut (C. mollissima), are prac­
tical alternatives to American chestnut.
Chestnuts are not especially demanding 
in their soil requirements, as long as drainage 
is good. They are remarkably heat-tolerant. 
Plant in a sunny location: set out in spring or 
fall as balled-and-burlapped plants.
Problems
Leaves skeletonized. Causes: Canker- 
worms; Japanese beetles. These V i'-l" long, 
green, yellow, or brown caterpillars feed on 
foliage, often defoliating the tree. To avoid 
this problem, apply a band of a sticky substance, 
such as Tanglefoot, around the base of the 
tree in spring to keep females from climbing 
up the tree and laying their eggs. Apply fresh 
coats in September and February to trap both 
spring and fall cankerworms. If their feeding 
becomes a problem, spray with BTK as soon 
as you notice them; continue every 2 weeks 
until pests are gone.
Japanese beetles often feed on chestnut 
leaves, causing similar symptoms. See "Leaves 
skeletonized" on page 236 for control sug­
gestions.
Plant defoliated. Cause: Gypsy moths. 
See "Plant defoliated" on page 236 for controls.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
See "Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed" on page 236 for 
more information.
Cop

70 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT G lrIDE
Nuts damaged. Cause: Chestnut weevils. 
The larvae of this pest feed inside the nuts, 
and then enter the soil when the nuts fall to 
the ground. Pick fallen nuts from the ground 
daily to reduce future populations.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. Several kinds 
of borers attack chestnuts; see “Trunk or 
branches with small holes; limbs die or break 
off' on page 238 for controls.
Chives
Allium spp. (Liliaceae)
Common chives (Allium schoenoprasum) 
are a hardy (Zone 3) perennial herb grown for 
their mild, onion-flavored leaves and pink 
flowers. Garlic chives (A. tuberosum) are 
slightly less hardy (Zone 5), and have larger, 
straplike leaves and white, rose-scented flowers. 
To grow healthy, trouble-free plants, sow seed 
indoors in 60°-70°F soil mix, or outdoors after 
soil has warmed. Chives do best in moderately 
rich, moist, well-drained soil with a pH between 
5.0 and 7.0. Chives need full sun.
Chives are closely related to onions and 
prone to the same problems, especially rust, 
downy mildew, and smut. See the Onion entry 
beginning on page 155 for information.
Chrysanthemum
Chrysanthemum, garden mum. Perennials.
Early wild chrysanthemums, mentioned 
in 5th century B.C. writings, bore rather plain, 
yellow blossoms. Later, whites and purples
were found and cultivated. Today, hundreds 
of cultivars are available. Within this genus 
are Shasta daisies, costmary, painted daisies, 
feverfew, and marguerites, in addition to the 
huge array of colors and blossoms found among 
the popular hardy mums.
Full sun and fertile, well-drained soil pro­
mote healthy mums. Fertilize plants in spring 
with compost or a slow-acting, general-purpose 
fertilizer, then give supplemental feedings 
monthly during the growing season: stop fer­
tilizing in August. Start plants from stem 
cuttings, divisions, or seeds. When buying 
mums, look for compact, bushy plants, which 
will flower better than larger specimens. Space 
1' apart, avoiding areas already occupied by 
tree and shrub roots. When plants reach 6'-8", 
pinch growing tips back to stimulate branch­
ing and flower bud production. Give these 
shallow-rooted plants W -V 'o f water weekly; 
water stress causes woody stems and lower 
leaf drop. Overwatering, particularly when 
combined with poor drainage, causes yellow­
ing leaves that blacken and drop. Cut plants 
back to within a few inches of the ground after 
blooming. Protect roots with a winter mulch.
Although the list of pests and diseases 
that may attack chrysanthemums is long, mums 
are relatively trouble-free. Unless mums are 
stressed by unfavorable growing conditions, 
few pests will seek them out; fewer still will 
cause significant damage.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. See 
“Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects” on page 177 for 
controls.
Leaves with yellow-brown spots or blotches; 
leaves die and turn brittle. Cause: Foliar 
nematodes. These microscopic roundworms 
overwinter in soil or plant debris, then travel 
up a plant's stem in the film of water created 
by spring rains, entering the lower leaves

CIMICIFIJGA ■ 
71
through the stomata, which are minute open­
ings in the leaves. Symptoms move up the 
plant; foliar nematodes may even infest the 
petals. Spots eventually cover entire leaves, 
which die, turn brittle, and drop. Severe infes­
tations can kill entire plants. Remove and 
destroy infested plants and the surrounding 
soil; do not compost the debris. There is no 
cure; clean up debris in fall to destroy over­
wintering nematodes. Rotate plantings and 
mulch in spring to keep nematodes from climb­
ing up plants; avoid wetting leaves when 
watering.
Leaves with tan or brown blotches or ser­
pentine tunnels. Cause; Leafminers. These 
tiny pale green fly larvae feed between the 
upper and lower surfaces of leaves. Prune off 
and destroy infested leaves until only healthy 
growth remains. Remove debris in fall to destroy 
overwintering leafminers. Let parasitic wasps 
control these pests, or repel larvae with weekly 
insecticidal soap sprays starting when the first 
tunnel appears.
Leaves and flowers greenish yellow, dis­
torted; new growth spindly. Cause: Viral 
diseases. Chrysanthemums are prone to sev­
eral viruses, which are spread by sucking insects 
such as aphids and leafhoppers. Control such 
pests to limit virus problems. Remove and 
destroy infected plants; do not compost them. 
Wash tools used around infected plants. Viruses 
overwinter in perennials and weeds such as 
daisies and plantains.
Cimicifuga
Bugbane, snakeroot. Perennials.
The durable bugbanes are 2'-6' tall natives 
that spread to 2' wide. Small creamy white 
blooms appear in multiples to cover upright, 
slim spikes that tower above the dark green.
fernlike leaves. Flowering occurs from late 
summer to early fall, depending on species. 
Flower aroma has been described as “sickly 
sweet” and “strange." W hether it deters pests 
or not remains undetermined, but parts of 
stinking bugbane (Cimicifuga foetida) are being 
tested as a general insect repellent.
Bugbanes prosper in rich, moist, well- 
drained, organic soil, similar to their native 
woodland habitat. These plants prefer light 
shade; bugbanes grown in deep shade bear 
fewer flowers. Plants can succeed in sunny 
areas with ample watering. Clumps expand 
outward slowly and can be divided in fall or 
spring, but bugbanes are deep-rooted and may 
suffer from division. Germination from seed 
is slow and inconsistent. Provide a winter 
mulch in colder areas, a protective summer 
mulch in warmer areas. Fertilize and water 
regularly.
Problems
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. While sturdy bugbanes with­
stand most pest invasions well, check regu­
larly beneath the dense clumps of foliage for 
slugs and snails. Differing only in the presence 
or absence of a shell, slugs and snails range in 
size from */*" to 8" and may be gray, tan, green, 
black, yellow, or spotted. These voracious mol- 
lusks rasp large holes in leaves and stems, 
leaving slimy mucus trails as they travel.
Repel slugs and snails from flower beds 
with a 4"-8" strip of copper edging, or sur­
round plant with a band of cinders, wood 
ashes, cedar sawdust, or diatomaceous earth, 
and renew frequently. Trap slugs and snails 
with shallow pans of stale beer set with rims 
flush with the soil surface; remove drowned 
pests daily. Or lay boards, cabbage leaves, or 
overturned clay pots around the garden, and 
destroy pests that congregate underneath. Hand- 
pick slugs and snails from plants at night; 
drop them into soapy water or sprinkle them 
with table salt to dehydrate and kill them.

72 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Citrus
Citrtis spp. ( Rutaceae)
Citrus trees are evergreens that grow in 
flushes throughout the year. They bear fra­
grant flowers and fruit that hangs for months 
without dropping. These plants are hardy in 
Zones 9-10.
To flourish and bear well, citrus trees 
require a site with excellent drainage and full 
sun. Prune to remove dead wood, to keep 
trees in bounds, and to thin out centers where 
growth is too dense. Citrus flowers attract 
bees; don't plant them in high-traffic areas. 
Citrus trees bear fruit without cross-pollination.
Fruit Problems
Fruit with raised, light brown, corky areas.
Cause: Citrus scab. Leaves also may show 
scabby lesions. This fungal disease, common 
in Florida, attacks mainly grapefruit, ‘Temple' 
and ‘Murcott* honey oranges, lemons, sour 
oranges, satsumas, and some tangelos. To con­
trol citrus scab, prune and site trees so that 
foliage and fruit remain as dry as possible 
during spring growth.
Fruit with small, brown, sunken spots that 
turn dark and are raised. Cause: Melanose. 
This fungal disease usually attacks trees more 
than 10 years old and is worst in wet springs. 
As rain washes spores over fruit, a tear-streaked 
pattern of infection develops. Copper spray 
applied just once at fruit set controls this dis­
ease, but since fruit damage is only cosmetic, 
spraying isn't really necessary. Keep melanose 
in check by pruning out dead wood, which 
may harbor the disease.
Fruit with firm, light brown spots on the 
rind. Cause: Brown rot. In humid weather 
brown rot may appear as a white mold on the
rind. Rain splashes the spores of this fungal 
disease from the ground onto low-hanging fruit. 
The simplest control is to mulch the soil around 
the tree and prune away low-hanging branches. 
Copper spray applied to the ground and low- 
hanging limbs also works. This disease spreads 
easily in stored fruit; keep infected fruit away 
from clean fruit.
Fruit contains webbing. Cause: Navel 
orangeworms. These reddish orange, brown- 
headed larvae bore into cracked fruit and spin 
their cocoons inside. Control pests by picking 
off damaged fruit. Clean up dropped fruit. 
Spray BTK to kill larvae before they enter.
Leaf and Branch Problems
Leaves with pale yellow stipples. Cause: 
Citrus mites. These pests may also attack fruit 
causing it to turn brown or silver and drop 
prematurely. Pesticides tend to kill natural 
mite predators, so unsprayed trees are less 
prone to mite infestation. You can also intro­
duce predatory mites, such as Amblyseius 
species. The simplest mite remedy is to hose 
down the tree with plain water or insecticidal 
soap solution. For more serious infestations, 
spray superior oil or sulfur.
Leaves with oily brown spots on undersides. 
Cause: Greasy spot. With this fungal disease, 
yellowish brown blisters on leaf undersides 
eventually turn oily brown and coalesce. Super­
ficial pitting may appear on fruit rind. Since 
the disease overwinters on leaf litter, the sim­
plest control is to collect and destroy fallen 
leaves. Wet foliage encourages spread of the 
fungus; keep leaves as dry as possible, espe­
cially during the early summer. For recurrent 
greasy spot, spray with superior oil or copper.
Trunk with brown patches exuding a thick, 
amber gum. Cause: Brown rot gummosis. 
Eventually brown patches form dark, sunken 
cankers. Lower branches above the canker 
may wither and die. This disease begins when

CURL’S ■ 
73
spores of Phytophthora fungus splash up from 
the ground and enter the trunk through a bark 
injury. To control this disease, scrape away 
the canker into healthy bark, allow it to dry, 
and spray it with copper. To prevent the disease, 
keep surface water and sprinkler water away 
from the trunk. Plant only in well-drained soil 
using trees grafted onto Phytophthora-resistant 
rootstocks, such as trifoliate orange, sour 
orange, and ‘Tr oyer' cit range.
Leaves with small, dark, circular depres­
sions bearing yellow margins. Cause: Mela­
nose. For more information, see "Fruit with 
small, brown, sunken spots that turn dark and 
are raised" above.
Leaves turn pale green or yellow. Cause: 
Nutrient deficiency. If old leaves turn yellow 
and drop off, suspect nitrogen deficiency, a 
condition that sometimes occurs when cold 
soil slows root activity. If young leaves turn 
yellow with green veins, suspect iron deficiency, 
a condition common to wet or alkaline soils, 
even if the soil contains enough iron. To cor­
rect nitrogen deficiency, apply an organic nitro­
gen source directly to the soil. To correct iron 
deficiency, adjust the soil pH to be more acidic. 
You can also spray either of these nutrients 
directly on the leaves for immediate help.
Leaves turn yellow and fall; tree declines. 
Cause: Scales. Various types of scales infest 
citrus trees, causing decline. Trees may suffer 
from twig dieback and reduced vigor, and 
leaves may be covered with honeydew excreted 
by the scales as well as sooty mold, which 
feeds on the honeydew. Cottony cushion scale 
looks like white, cottony masses clustered on 
leaves, stems, and branches. Red. brown, or 
black scale may look like crusty, waxy, or 
smooth bumps on leaves, trunk, stems, or fruit. 
Many natural enemies keep scale insects in 
check. If scale infestation is heavy, introduce 
outside predators for additional control. You 
must choose the species of predator that feeds 
on your species of scale. For example. Vidalia
beetles (Rodolia cardinalis) feed on cottony 
cushion scale, and the parasitic wasp Aphyiis 
melinus preys on California red scale. Ants 
protect scales by destroying their natural pre­
dators. so keep ants out of trees with sticky 
barriers around trunks. You can also control 
scale by spraying specially refined superior oil.
I>eaves with white, cottony masses. Cause: 
Mealybugs. Leaves may also be covered with 
a sticky honeydew excreted by the mealybugs 
or a black mold, which feeds on the honeydew. 
Natural enemies, such as lacewings. usually 
keep mealybugs in check, but you can speed 
along the process by introducing the mealy­
bug destroyer, an Australian predatory beetle 
available through commercial insectaries and 
organic farm suppliers. Ants protect mealy­
bugs by destroying their natural predators. 
Restrict ants from trees by placing sticky bar­
riers around trunks and removing branches 
that droop to the ground.
New leaves curled or twisted. Cause: 
Aphids. Look on leaf undersides for clusters 
of these tiny sucking insects. Many natural 
enemies keep aphids in check, including para­
sitic wasps and hover flies. Provide food for 
natural predators and parasites by growing 
nectar-producing flowers, such as dill and 
buckwheat, near your trees. Or spray com­
mercial or homemade veast-and-sugar mix­
tures on your trees to attract predators. 
Introduced lady beetles may not control aphids 
effectively, but introduced lacewings often do. 
Ants protect aphids by destroying their natu­
ral predators, so restrict ant movement into 
your trees with sticky barriers around the trunks. 
Excessive use of nitrogen fertilizer favors aphid 
reproduction.
For heavy infestations, apply a strong spray 
of water or insecticidal soap solution to trees, 
making sure you spray undersides of leaves as 
well. Superior oil sprays kill aphid eggs. Pyre­
thrin also works, but use it only as a last resort 
since il also kills beneficial insects.

74 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Clematis
Clematis. Vines.
Clematis are mostly deciduous vines that 
climb by means of their twining leaf stalks. 
They bear attractive flowers in a range of sizes 
and colors.
Clematis prefer neutral to slightly alkaline 
soils, well-enriched with compost. Set out small, 
container-grown plants in spring or fall, plant­
ing several inches deeper than when grown 
in the nursery. Provide some sort of support. 
Clematis perform best in full sun, but they 
do like to have their roots cool and shaded; 
a rich. deep, organic mulch is of great ben­
efit. Clematis may be slow to initiate top 
growth; they must first establish a substantial 
root system.
Problems
Vines droop and shrivel. Cause: Clema­
tis wilt. This fungal disease is one of the most 
serious problems for clematis. When it strikes, 
prune out and destroy all affected parts. If you 
set the plant a few inches deeper than it was 
growing in the nursery at transplanting time, 
new vines may come up from the buried stem 
portion and produce new, healthy topgrowth. 
If the whole plant dies, don’t try to grow another 
clematis on that site.
Plant stunted; top dies back. Cause: Cle­
matis borers. This 2A" long, white-bodied, 
brown-headed grub feeds on the roots and 
crowns of clematis vines. To control, cut out 
and destroy infested stems, and dig the larvae 
out of the crowns. Dig out and destroy severely 
infested plants.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stem and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237 for control suggestions.
Colchicum
Autumn crocus. Corms.
These hardy, autumn-flowering corms are 
not crocuses, despite their common name. 
Pink, white, or purple, 2"-4" tall flowers bloom 
without foliage, which comes up in early spring 
and dies off by midsummer. Narrow dark green 
leaves grow 6'-12" tall.
Plant autumn crocus corms in July and 
August, setting them 3 "deep in average, well- 
drained soil in full sun to light shade. Lift and 
separate corms after foliage fades to reduce 
crowding or to move plantings; replant im­
mediately.
Almost no pests or diseases bother these 
corms, which are quite poisonous if eaten.
Coleus
Coleus. Annuals.
Brilliant red, maroon, cream, and green 
leaves make coleus a colorful addition to the 
shady garden. Coleus can grow to 3' but are 
usually smaller. The flowers are insignificant, 
so pinch them off to promote leaf growth.
Sow seeds indoors 10 weeks before last 
spring frost. Seeds need light to germinate, so 
don’t cover them. After the last frost, trans­
plant outdoors into rich, well-drained soil and 
moderate shade. Too much sun fades leaves 
and causes drooping. Feed with high-nitrogen 
fertilizer to encourage leaf development.
Coleus are usually trouble-free. Mealy­
bugs may feed on plants; see “Leaves and 
stems with white, cottony clusters” on page 
20 for controls.
Cop

COREOPSIS ■ 
75
Collard
Brussica oleracea 
Acephala group (Cruciferae)
Collards are a cool-season vegetable grown 
for the leafy, cabbage-type greens. Collards 
can stand more heat than other members of 
the cabbage family. They prefer growing tem­
peratures of 65°-70°F and tolerate 40°-80°E 
‘Champion* and ‘Vatcs are cold-hardy cultivars. 
Soil pH should be between 5.5 and 6.8.
Collards are grown like cabbage and are 
attacked by the same diseases and insects. See 
the Cabbage entry beginning on page 52 for 
culture and information on problems.
Convallaria
Lily-of-the-valley. Perennials.
Fragrant lilies-of-the-valley (Convallaria 
majalis) scent springtime air with small, white, 
dangling bell-shaped flowers carried on stalks 
above 6" long, pointed green leaves. Attrac­
tive but poisonous red berries follow the 
blossoms. Lily-of-the-valley spreads by thick 
rhizomes. Purple shoots appear in April, fol­
lowed by buds.
Plants multiply rapidly: in favorable con­
ditions they can be invasive, a trait that makes 
lily-of-the-valley useful as a ground cover in 
controlled situations. Late fall division encour­
ages bloom. Plant lilies-of-the-valley about 5" 
apart in moist, well-drained, organic soil. The 
light shade beneath deciduous trees is fine for 
these woodland natives: heavy shade decreases 
bloom. Fertilize in fall.
Problems
Leaves stippled, reddish to yellow, with 
fine webbing. Cause: Spider mites. T hese'/»" 
arachnids quickly disfigure ornamentals. Their 
feeding on the undersides of foliage causes it 
to yellow, dry up, and die; excessive feeding 
turns foliage almost white and fine webs cover 
leaves and growing tips. Mites seek out water- 
stressed plants in hot, dry weather; adequate 
watering guards against these pests. Hose down 
plants when symptoms first appear; a strong 
stream knocks mites off plants and may give 
sufficient control. Introduce predatory mites 
(1,000 per 500 square feet); spray severe infes­
tations with avermectins, citrus oils, insectici­
dal soap, neem, or pyrethrin.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. See “Leaves with large, rag­
ged holes” on page 177 for recommended 
controls.
Coreopsis
Coreopsis, tickseed. Perennials.
Golden daisylike flowers grace plantings 
of coreopsis from mid-June well into July. Most 
species of these 1 -3' plants are hardy perennials, 
although tickseed [Coreopsisgrandiflora) per­
forms as a biennial north of Zone 7. Prolific
1 "-3", single or double blooms attract benefi­
cial syrphid flies.
Space coreopsis 15" apart in well-drained, 
average to poor soil in full sun. Once established, 
these natives are very drought-tolerant but 
bloom better with regular watering. Excess 
feeding encourages rank, spindly growth; a 
single spring fertilization is sufficient. Remove 
spent flowers to prolong bloom and reduce
Copyrighted material

76 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
coreopsis tendency to self-sow. Divide clumps 
every 3-4 years.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. See 
"Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects’* on page 177 for 
controls.
Buds and leaves deformed or dwarfed.
Cause: Four-lined plant bugs. For recom­
m ended controls, see “ Buds and leaves 
deformed or dwarfed" on page 178.
Leaves stippled, distorted. Cause: Aster 
leafhoppers. Greenish yellow pests only '/«" 
long, these insects feed on leaf undersides, 
giving foliage a finely mottled look; leaves 
yellow, shrivel, and drop. Besides injury from 
feeding, leafhoppers transmit the disease aster 
yellows. Use water or insecticidal soap sprays 
to dislodge nymphs: encourage enemies such 
as bigeyed bugs and parasitic wasps. For con­
trol of severe infestations, spray plants with 
neem or pyrethrin.
Corn
Zea mays var. rugosa (Gramineae)
Corn is an annual vegetable grown for its 
large ears of tasty kernels. Sweet corn is har­
vested when the ears are tender and immature. 
Sweet corn cultivars are classified in 3 groups: 
normal sugary (traditional corn flavor, hybrid 
or open-pollinated 1. sugar enhanced (increased 
tenderness and sweetness, hybrid), and super­
sweet (God’s gift to sweet-toothed corn lovers, 
hybrid). Be sure to plant supersweets at least 
25' away from any other corn cultivars or 
cross-pollination will cause starchy, tough 
kernels. Be aware that whether you plant 
other cultivars or not. supersweet cultivars
generally suffer from more than their share 
of pests.
While most gardeners stick to sweet corn, 
other types of com are just as easy to grow. 
Popcorn, ornamental corn, and field corn are 
harvested when the seeds are hard and mature 
and the husks are dry. Popcorn is popped for a 
tasty, low-caloric snack. Dent (field) com  and 
flint (Indian! corn cultivars are used for corn- 
meal and decoration. Flour com  is starchy 
and used for flour and decoration.
Culture
Com does best in a rich, sandy, or well- 
worked soil with a pH between 5.5 and 6.8. 
Prepare soil by working in a generous amount 
of compost. Side-dress plants with alfalfa meal 
when they are 1' high and again when silk first 
shows at the end of the ears. Spraying plants 
with seaweed extract or compost tea periodi­
cally also improves your harvest and prevents 
deficiencies.
Plant com seed only after the soil is at 
least 60°R or 75°Ffor supersweets. Seed planted 
in cooler soil is prone to many problems, includ­
ing poor germination. To help speed soil 
warming, cover soil with clear plastic at least
2 weeks before you want to plant. After plant­
ing, use row cover for about a month to give 
seedlings a boost.
Corn needs at least 1" of water a week. 
Keep soil moist, but not soggy. Mulch plants 
to conserve moisture and cut down on weed 
competition.
Plant com in blocks rather than long sin­
gle rows to ensure good pollination. Do not 
plant corn where it has grown in the past 2 
years to prevent problems. After harvest cut 
or mow stalks and let them dry. Then turn 
them under or collect and compost them. 
Destroy any diseased or infested material.
Leaf and Whole Plant Problems
Seedlings cut off at ground level; leaf mar­
gins ragged. Cause: Cutworms. Young cut-

CORN 
■ 
77
Adult
Larva*
CORN ♦ **■5 3 ® "'
Ears with tunnels 
and chewed kernels.
Cause: Com earworms. 
Larva** are yellow-white, green, 
or brownish caterpillars with 
lengthwise stripes.
Leaves with orange-brow n
raised spots. Cause: Rust. Spots 
on upper and lower leaves enlarge, 
turn brown-black; leaves may die.
V  
1" wingspan 
Adult
Seedlings purplish.
Cause: Phosphorus 
deficiency. Afflicted 
plants have poor, 
shallow root 
systems: small, 
deformed ears.
Ears with tunnels and chewed kernels.
Cause: European corn borers. Larvae are pink
to gray caterpillars with brown heads.
worms feed on leaves. Most cutworms are 
gray or dull brown and up to 2" long. Spray 
seedlings with BTK in the evening if cutworms 
are still feeding on leaves. Sprinkle moist bran 
mixed with BTK on the soil surface in the eve­
ning, or add parasitic nematodes to the soil to 
control stem-girdling cutworms. For small plant­
ings, place cutworm collars around plants or 
groups of plants to prevent damage.
Seedlings fail to emerge or are stunted. 
Causes: Cool soil: com rootworms: seedcom 
beetles; wireworms: seedcorn maggots; white 
grubs. Corn seed germinates poorly in cool 
soil and is more prone to insect damage and 
rots. Plant after soil is warm to prevent problems. 
Do not plant com where grass grew the year 
before because many pests live in sod.
Corn rootworms are white, slender, xti' 
long larvae with brown heads. Adults are 
beetles. Western rootworm beetles are */»" and 
yellow with 3 black stripes. Northern root­
worm adults are yellow to pale green, and 
southern rootworms (spotted cucumber bee­
tles) are yellow-green with 11 black spots. Root­
worm larvae feed on seeds, and adults feed on 
leaves, silks, and tassels.
Seedcom beetle larvae are white, slender, 
W ' long grubs: adults are '//' long ground 
beetles with light brown edges. Both larvae 
and adults feed on seeds.
Wireworms are I 1/*” long, yellow to red­
dish brown, slender, tough-bodied, segmented 
larvae with brown heads. Adults are dark- 
colored, elongated click beetles.
Seedcorn maggots are V*" long, yellow- 
white. and spindle-shaped. Adults are small 
flies. White grubs have thick, soft. V*" bodies 
and curl into a C-shape when disturbed. Adults 
are Japanese or June beetles. Wireworms. seed­
corn maggots, and white grubs eat corn seed.
Apply parasitic nematodes to the soil 
before planting to control soil-dwelling pests.

78 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANTGt'IDE
Prevent adults from laying eggs on or near 
seedbed by covering it with a large piece of 
row cover after planting. Remove row cover 
when tassels appear.
Seedlings purplish. Cause: Phosphorus 
deficiency. See page 77 for an illustration of 
this condition. Phosphorus is not readily avail­
able in cool soils. Spray plants with seaweed 
extract or compost tea to alleviate symptoms.
Plant stunted and yellow. Causes: Nitro­
gen deficiency: too much or too little water: 
nematodes. If older leaves turn yellow first, 
suspect nitrogen deficiency. Drench roots and 
spray plants with fish emulsion or compost 
tea to alleviate symptoms.
To avoid root damage, keep the soil evenly 
moist. Plant in raised beds to ensure good 
drainage.
If entire plant is yellow and doesn't green 
up when sprayed with seaweed or compost, 
and soil is well-drained and not too dry. sus­
pect pest nematodes. Roots may be stubby or 
have swellings or beadlike galls. Control by 
applying chitin or parasitic nematodes to soil.
Leaves yellow and curled; plant stunted. 
Cause: Aphids. These small, soft-bodied, 
green, black, gray. pink, or white fluffy-coated 
insects suck plant sap. For mild infestations, 
knock pests off plants with a blast of water. 
Spray infested plants with insecticidal soap, 
or use a commercial neem or pyrethrin spray 
for severe infestations.
Leaves mottled yellow and green. Cause: 
Maize dwarf mosaic. The stem doesn't grow 
normally, so new leaves are very close together. 
Leaves may develop lengthwise stripes. There 
is no cure; destroy infected plants. Prevent 
problems by controlling aphids, which spread 
the virus as they feed, and perennial weeds 
such as Johnsongrass that can harbor the 
disease. Plant tolerant cultivars such as Bell- 
ringer*, ‘Bi-guard', “Bunker Hill", “Earlibelle’, 
‘Enforcer*, “Merit*, and “Silverette*.
Leaves with lengthwise yellow stripes; 
plant may wilt. Cause: Bacterial wilt. Leaves
are dwarfed. Cut off the infected plant near 
the soil line and look for yellow bacterial slime 
oozing from the cut stem to confirm diagnosis. 
Destroy infected plants. Control flea beetles 
and cucumber beetles that spread the disease. 
Prevent problems by planting resistant culti­
vars such as ‘Bellringer*, “Bunker Hill*, 
“Buttersweet*, “Earlibelle*. “Gold Cup*. “Merit*. 
“Silverado*, “Silver Queen*, “Stylpak*, ‘Summer 
Pearl’, and “Sweet Sue*.
Leaves with yellow, tan, or gray spots or 
blotches. Causes: Northern or southern corn 
leaf blight; other fungal leaf spots. Spray 
infected plants with sulfur to prevent blight 
from spreading. Prevent problems by using a
3-year rotation for corn and by planting culti­
vars, such as “Sweet Sal’ and ‘Ultimate’, that 
are tolerant of northern leaf blight or Apache’, 
Cherokee’, “Comet’, ‘Florida Staysweet’. and 
“Wintergreen*, which resist both blights.
Leaves with orange-brown raised spots. 
Cause: Rust. See page 77 for an illustration of 
this disease. Spray infected plants with sulfur 
early in the day and thin plants to maintain 
good air circulation. If rust is a recurrent 
problem, try spraying plants with an antitrans- 
pirant before symptoms develop to prevent 
infection. (Do not spray with antitranspirant 
when corn is silking.) Plant rust-tolerant culti­
vars such as “Earlibelle*. “Flavor King*. ‘Sum­
mer Pearl*, and “Sweetie 82*.
Leaves with numerous small holes. 
Causes: Flea beetles; billbugs. Leaves may 
develop bleached-out spots or stripes. Flea 
beetles are tiny black insects that hop when 
disturbed. They can transmit disease and are 
likely to be more numerous after mild winters. 
Cover plants with row cover as soon as they 
come up to exclude beetles. Remove row cover 
when tassels form. Treat plants with a com­
mercial neem or pyrethrin spray to control 
severe infestations.
If holes are arranged in rows, look for 
billbugs. These hard-shelled, nearly black, 
l/*n- W  snout beetles are usually seen only at

CORN 
■ 
79
night. Spray heavily infested corn plants with 
pyrethrin.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Causes: 
Corn earworms; European corn borers: army­
worms; other caterpillars. Handpick or spray 
plants with BTK if caterpillars are feeding. 
See "Ears with tunnels and chewed kernels’* 
below for controls.
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Japanese 
beetles. Silk and tassels may be chewed. Adults 
are 
long, metallic blue-green beetles with 
bronze wing covers. Handpick or trap adults. 
Reduce beetle population in following years 
by applying parasitic nematodes or milky dis­
ease spores to garden and lawn areas.
Stems girdled at base; stems and ears with 
tunnels. Cause: Southwestern corn borers. 
These white, dark-spotted, brown-headed lar­
vae bore into stalks and ears. To reduce future 
damage, plant com early and use resistant 
cultivars. Cut com stalks down at the soil level 
and remove them right after harvest.
Ear Problems
Ears with tunnels and chewed kernels.
Causes: Corn earworms; European corn bor­
ers; fall armyworms. Leaves and silk may be 
chewed. Stalks and tassels may be tunneled 
and may snap off. Corn earworm larvae are 
light yellow, green, pink, or brown caterpillars 
up to 2" long, with lengthwise stripes. Adults 
are tan moths. See page 77 for an illustration 
of this pest.
European com  borer larvae are beige, 
brown-spotted caterpillars up to 1" long, with 
brown heads. Adults are pale yellow to tan 
moths with wavy lines on their wings. See 
page 77 for an illustration of this pest.
Armyworm larvae are greenish brown cat­
erpillars up to 1V?" long, with a characteristic 
inverted Y on the head. Adults are pale gray 
moths and have a 1 Vi" wingspan.
Cover plants with row cover until tassels 
emerge to exclude the first generation of pests,
especially if you have had problems in previ­
ous years.
Use insect-specific pheromone traps to 
catch male moths of various pest species, or 
ask your local extension agent when moths 
appear in your area. If you are growing large 
quantities of corn, you may want to try using a 
blacklight trap to catch all types of moths; be 
aware that many kinds of beneficial insects 
are also attracted to and killed by these traps. 
When moths are present, spray plants with 
pyrethrin in the evening to prevent pests from 
laying eggs.
Even before the tassels emerge, check the 
upright, topmost leaves of your plants every
2-3 days for signs of caterpillar feeding. Spray 
BTK as soon as any feeding holes are found. 
Make sure to spray the undersides of leaves and 
insides of unfolding leaves where pests feed.
Once silks appear, spray them with BTK 
or sprinkle a few grains of granular BTK directly 
on each silk. Apply a few drops of mineral oil 
to each silk 4-5 days after they wilt to discour­
age any resident pests, or inject a few drops of 
parasitic nematode suspension around the tip 
of the ear to kill larvae.
Kernels at tips or upper half of ears hol­
lowed out. Cause: Sap beetles. These small 
black beetles with yellow spots invade ears 
after the silks turn brown. Handpick beetles, 
or spray ear tips with a commercial pyrethrin 
solution for severe infestations. Sap beetles 
can be trapped in containers baited with fer­
menting fruit.
Ears with dried tips exposed; ears stripped 
or missing. Causes: Birds; raccoons. Birds 
peck at tips of ears, exposed tips turn dry and 
greenish brown. Raccoons harvest ripe, juicy 
com, usually the night before you would pick 
it yourself. Repel birds with loud noises or 
visual scare devices. Frustrate raccoons by 
surrounding your com  with a 3-strand electric 
fence with wires 3"-4" apart and off the ground. 
See “Stopping Animal Pests' on page 408 for 
further information.

80 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Ears misshapen or with areas of undevel­
oped kernels. Causes: Poor pollination: nutri­
ent deficiency: viral diseases. Insufficient or 
ineffective pollination can cause undeveloped 
bare tips, scattered kernels, or entirely bare 
cobs. Plant corn in a block, rather than a long 
row to ensure effective wind pollination. Insects 
feeding on silks before pollination occurs can 
prevent pollination, as can very dry conditions. 
Control insects that feed on silk, and keep soil 
moist, but not wet, to ensure even pollination.
Ears with bare, undeveloped tips can also 
be caused by potassium deficiency. Phospho­
rus deficiency also causes small, irregular ears. 
See page 77 for an illustration of this condition. 
If ears are misshapen and kernels have corky, 
brown bands at their bases, suspect boron 
deficiency. Spray young plants with seaweed 
extract or compost tea to help prevent defi­
ciencies. Confirm deficiencies with a soil test 
and amend soil as needed.
Viral diseases such as maize dwarf mosaic 
can cause poor kernel formation at base of 
ears or bare ears. See “Leaves mottled yellow 
and green* on page 78 for more symptoms.
Ears or tassels with enlarged galls. Cause : 
Corn smut. Young galls are firm and whitish, 
older ones are spongy and filled with black 
powder. Remove galls before they split open, 
and destroy infected plants. Do not compost 
them. Prevent problems by planting resistant 
cultivars such as ‘Bellringer*, ‘Gold Cup*, ‘Merit*, 
‘Sweet Sue*, and ‘Viking*.
Cornus
Dogwood. Shrubs and small trees.
Dogwoods are deciduous trees or shrubs, 
usually with opposite leaves. These plants pro­
vide year-round landscape interest with their
showy flowers, attractive fruit, striking fall 
color, and interesting bark. Use dogwoods as 
specimen plants, in woodland plantings, or as 
informal barriers.
Culture
Spring is the best time to plant dogwoods, 
as balled-and-burlapped or container-grown 
plants. Most thrive in well-drained soil enriched 
with organic matter. The tree forms, in par­
ticular, are intolerant of drought, so water 
them thoroughly in dry periods. A deep or­
ganic mulch helps to conserve moisture and 
keep down weeds. The shrub types will grow 
in sun or partial shade; the trees are best in 
dappled shade.
Dogwoods vary widely in their suscepti­
bility to pests and diseases. Some, such as 
flowering dogwood (Cornus florida), tend to 
have more problems than resilient species like 
kousa dogwood (C. kousa) and cornelian cherry 
dogwood (C. mas). To avoid problems with 
any dogwood, keep plants growing vigorously 
with regular watering and fertilization. Avoid 
damaging the trunk with lawn mowers, string 
trimmers, or pruning equipment; many dog­
wood problems, like canker and borers, enter 
plants through wounds in the bark.
Problems
Trunk with lumpy swellings; limbs die or 
break off; bark Calls off. Cause: Borers. Sev­
eral species of borers attack dogwoods. The 
most common type, the dogwood borer, has 
white-bodied, brown-headed larvae. They hatch 
from eggs laid on the bark and enter the tree 
through wounds or scars in the bark. Dog­
wood borers often attack young, newly trans­
planted trees.
Although tree wraps have long been rec­
ommended to protect dogwoods from borers, 
research has shown that these guards are not 
a good idea. They tend to keep bark soft and 
moist, actually protecting borer larvae. If you

COSMOS ■ 
81
want to use a tree wrap to protect plants from 
winter deer damage, remove the guard during 
the growing season. Also, avoid wounding the 
trunk with lawn mowers, string trimmers, or 
pruning equipment; these injuries provide an 
easy entrance for borers. Preventive measures 
are the best control for these pests. If borers 
do strike, try cutting them out of the trunk 
with a sharp knife. Remove and destroy seri­
ously infected trees.
Leaves with small, purple-rimmed spots 
or large brown blotches; twigs die back. Cause; 
Dogwood anthracnose. This fungal disease 
can be a serious problem on flowering dogwood. 
Lower branches die back as the disease pro­
gresses; eventually the whole tree may die. 
The problem is most serious in woodland 
settings, where the dogwoods may already be 
weakened by lack of light and competition for 
food and water. Vigorously growing plants are 
more resistant. If disease does strike, prune 
out affected parts; clean up and destroy fallen 
leaves in autumn. A dormant spray of lime- 
sulfur or bordeaux mix may give some control.
Leaves yellow, sparse, distorted, or with 
brown edges; branches die; growth stunted. 
Cause: Decline. In recent years, flowering 
dogwoods have been afflicted by decline. The 
exact cause is unknown. Trees that are stressed 
by insects, disease, or environmental changes 
are very susceptible to further pest and dis­
ease problems. Dogwood anthracnose (see 
above) commonly attacks already weakened 
trees, for example. For more information, 
see “Leaves yellow, sparse, distorted, or with 
brown edges; branches die; growth stunted’' 
on page 238.
Twigs die back. Cause: Twig blight. Prune 
off affected parts back to live wood. Keep the 
tree growing vigorously with regular watering 
and fertilization.
IVunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
“Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; branch
tips die back" on page 238 for more information.
Twigs with clublike galls. Cause: Gall 
midges. The orange larvae of these small red­
dish brown midges tunnel into young shoots. 
One-inch-long swellings form around the devel­
oping larvae on the twig; leaves on the branch 
may wilt or turn brown. Prune off and destroy 
galls as soon as you see them.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stem and leaves covered with small 
bumps’’ on page 237 for controls.
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. See 
“Leaves tunneled’’ on page 237 for suggested 
controls.
Leaves with powdery white coating.
Cause: Powdery mildew. See "Leaves with pow­
dery white coating" on page 237 for controls.
Cosmos
Cosmos. Annuals.
The daisy like flowers of these fast-growing 
plants come in many shades of red, yellow, 
white, pink, lavender, and magenta. Cosmos 
bloom on lVi'-4\ slender stems covered with 
finely cut foliage.
Direct-sow cosmos outdoors from March 
through July. Seedlings appear in 10 days. Cos­
mos are also easy to transplant. Space plants 
8"-24" apart, depending on ultimate size. They 
prefer full sun and light, average soil kept 
slightly on the dry side. Avoid overwatering, 
and do not fertilize.
Pinch back seedlings before flower buds 
form to encourage compact bushy plants, or 
buy lower-growing cultivars. Staking is neces­
sary for larger cosmos. Plant in groups or 
among sturdier bedding plants for extra wind 
protection. Plants may self-sow.

82 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Problems
Stems break. Cause: Stalk borers. These 
long, thin, striped caterpillars eat their way 
through cosmos stalk centers. Small, round 
stem holes may betray their presence. Once 
plants are visibly affected, there is no cure. If 
borers are a regular problem, spray plants with 
BTK early in the season as borers enter plants.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves, stems, and buds distorted" 
on page 20 for controls.
Leaves greenish yellow; growth poor. 
Cause: Aster yellows. For more information 
and control measures, see “Leaves greenish 
yellow; growth poor” on page 19.
Plant wilts suddenly. Cause: Bacterial 
wilt. This disease causes a soft rot at the base 
of the stem, killing plants quickly. Remove 
and destroy infected plants. Do not replant 
cosmos in that area.
Cotoneaster
Cotoncaster. Shrubs.
Cotoneasters are alternate-leaved ever­
green or deciduous shrubs with persistent red 
or black fruit. They are useful as groundcovers, 
in the rock garden, in foundation plantings, or 
overhanging a wall.
Plant in spring as balled-and-burlapped or 
container-grown plants. Although not particu­
lar as to soils, avoid poorly drained sites. Coto­
neasters do best in full sun. Cotoneasters can 
withstand wind, dry soil, and even salt spray.
Problems
Leaves, flowers, and branches blackened.
Cause: Fire blight. This bacterial disease causes
new shoots to wilt suddenly, turn dark, and 
die back. The disease eventually spreads, kill­
ing the whole plant. Lush new growth is par­
ticularly susceptible, so avoid overfertilizing. 
Prune out diseased tissue, cutting back at 
least 6" beyond the discolored area: destroy 
or dispose of prunings. Disinfect pruners after 
each cut in a 10 percent bleach solution (1 
part bleach to 9 parts water) to avoid spreading 
the disease to healthy wood. Spray copper or 
bordeaux mix the following spring during 
flowering.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See "Leaves wrinkled and discolored” 
on page 235 for controls.
Leaves pale and mottled. Cause: Lace 
bugs. These Vs'-1//', dark-colored bugs have 
lacy wings. They feed on the undersides of 
leaves and deposit small black spots of 
excrement. Severe infestations can cause early 
leaf drop. Control by spraying leaves with supe­
rior oil or insecticidal soap.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237 for more information.
Leaves skeletonized; branches webbed. 
Cause: Cotoneaster webworms. These W , yel­
lowish green to brown caterpillars feed on 
leaves and spin silken webs around leaves and 
stems. Young plants may die; older ones can 
be seriously weakened. Break up and remove 
the webs; spray plants with BTK.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See “Leaves stippled with 
yellow; foliage webbed” on page 236 for 
controls.
Leaves with brownish blisters underneath.
Cause: Pear leaf blister mites. These micro­
scopic mites live and feed on tissue inside 
leaves. They overwinter on buds and infest 
new leaves in spring. Spray plants in late win­
ter with dormant oil or fane-sulfur.

CROCUS 
■ 
83
Trunk or branches with smaU holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. See “Trunk 
or branches with small holes: limbs die or 
break off* on page 238 for controls.
Crataegus
Hawthorn. Trees.
Hawthorns are small, thorny, deciduous 
trees with alternate leaves and showy, white, 
pink, or red flowers. Hawthorns make attrac­
tive specimen trees, barriers, or hedges.
Set out balled-and-burlapped plants in 
full sun in early spring. Hawthorns are unde­
manding as to soil, but avoid poorly drained 
areas. Choose planting sites with good air 
circulation to minimize disease problems. To 
avoid rust diseases, don’t plant hawthorns where 
Eastern red cedar (.Juniperus virginiana) is 
common.
Hawthorns share many insect and dis­
ease problems with apples. For symptoms and 
controls, see the Apple entry beginning on 
page 21.
Crocus
Crocus. Corms.
Much like the first robins, dainty cro­
cuses signal spring's arrival. These low-growing 
flowers bear blooms of yellow, white, pink, 
and purple amid dark green, grasslike foliage 
in late winter and early spring. Fall-blooming 
species include showy crocus (Crocus specio-
m ), a blue- or white-flowered plant that blooms 
before leaves extend fully. Most species grow 
only 3"-6" tall.
Plant both spring- and fall-flowering spe­
cies as soon as corms are available. Corms are 
occasionally infected with dry rot: examine 
corms carefully when purchasing (see the illus­
tration on page 49). Full sun and well-drained 
soil are crocuses' main requirements: corms 
will grow and multiply undisturbed for years. 
Set 3"-4" deep and 2"-6” apart with pointed 
growing tips right side up. Avoid cutting foliage 
back until it fades naturally: early removal of 
leaves reduces flowering in subsequent years. 
Divide large clumps, as needed, after leaves 
die back; replant full-size corms and cormels 
(small corms growing from base of parent corm) 
immediately.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. Aphids 
may feed on foliage: see "Leaves, stems, and 
buds distorted, sticky; clusters of small insects" 
on page 51 for control information.
Plant disappears; corms missing. Cause: 
Animal pests. Rodents such as mice, voles, 
squirrels, and gophers ail will eat crocus corms 
and can quickly make a planting disappear. 
The presence of a pet dog or cat often deters 
rodents; if pets aren’t an option, try other 
techniques (see “Stopping Animal Pests’’ on 
page 408). Line planting beds with screen or 
hardware cloth to keep pests from burrowing 
around corms. Lay mesh over the top, too: 
crocus shoots can still squeeze through.
Leaves yellow, distorted; flowers absent; 
corms rotted. Cause: Bulb mites. If you sus­
pect these pests, dig the corms and use a 
magnifying glass to look for whitish, 
mites. Bulb mites favor rotting bulbs, but move 
from there into healthy bulbs, carrying harm­
ful bacteria and fungi with them. Their feed­

84 
■ 
PROBIJtM-SOLVING PIANT Gt'IDE
ing causes corky, brown spots that become 
powdery. Inspect corms carefully for damage 
or signs of infestation. Destroy badly infested 
bulbs and discard surrounding soil. Solarize 
the soil before planting corms in previously 
infested ground.
Cucumber
Cucumis sativus (Cucurbitaceae)
Cucumbers arc annual vegetables grown 
for their crisp and crunchy fruit. They add life 
to summer salads and make tasty pickles.
Culture
Cucumber seeds need 60°Fsoil to germi­
nate, so wait until weather is warm to plant. 
Make a second planting 4-5 weeks after the 
first so you will have fruit all season. Cover 
plants with floating row cover to protect them 
from insects and late cold snaps. Remove row 
cover when plants begin to flower so insects 
can pollinate the blossoms, or you will not get 
any fruit.
Cucumbers do best in well-drained, loose- 
textured soils with lots of organic matter. They 
will grow in soils with a pH between 5.5 and 
6.8, but prefer a pH above 6.0. Plants need lots 
of water, but don't let soil become saturated. 
Prevent disease problems by keeping leaves 
dry. Mulch cucumbers to help conserve water; 
black plastic is a good choice for central and 
northern areas, but in extremely warm areas it 
can warm the soil too much. Organic mulches 
are good, too, but may provide shelter for 
pests like squash bugs. Foil mulches help pre­
vent aphid problems. If rotting fruit is a problem, 
raise fruit off the ground by placing scraps of 
wood under them.
Rotate crops so that no member of the 
cucurbit family (squash, melon, and cucum­
ber) is grown in the same place more often 
than every 4 years.
Caution: Cucum ber leaves are easily 
burned by insecticidal soap and copper sprays. 
Use the most dilute spray recommended and 
use sparingly. Do not spray plants in direct sun 
or if temperatures are above 80°F and don't 
spray drought-stressed plants.
Leaf and Vine Problems
Leaves with chewed holes. Cause: Cucum­
ber beetles. Adults are V*" long, greenish yel­
low beetles with black stripes or spots. See 
page 214 for an illustration of the insects and 
damage. They attack young leaves and should 
be controlled immediately, as they can spread 
bacterial wilt or viruses. Treat plants with a 
commercial pyrethrin spray or dust. Prevent 
problems by planting cultivars. such as ‘Lib­
erty’ and ‘Wisconsin SMR58', that are toler­
ant of cucumber beetles.
Leaves with pale green patches; afflicted 
leaves wilt and blacken. Cause: Squash bugs. 
Adults are brownish black, V2"long bugs. Imma­
ture bugs are whitish green or gray with dark 
heads and legs. Both emit a strong, sharp 
smell when crushed. Eggs are bright orange 
and laid on undersides of leaves. See page 214 
for an illustration of the insect and its damage. 
Handpick adults and eggs. Trap bugs by laying 
a board near plants. Squash bugs will hide 
underneath it and can be destroyed each 
morning.
Leaves with yellow patches; older leaves 
mottled and distorted. Cause: Mosaic. For 
an illustration of this disease, see page 214. 
Remove and destroy diseased plants. Control 
aphids and cucumber beetles because they 
spread the virus. Reduce problems by plant­
ing cultivars, such as Comet*, ‘Fancipak*, 
Liberty*. ‘Monarch*, ‘Score*, Slicemaster*, 
‘Striker*, and 'W isconsin SMR58', that are

CUCUMBER 
■ 
85
resistant to mosaic diseases.
Leaves yellow, curled, and wilted. Cause : 
Aphids. Look for small, green, pink, gray, black, 
or white fluffy-coated, soft-bodied insects feed­
ing on plants. Aphids can also transmit viruses. 
For mild infestations, knock pests off plants 
with a blast of water. Control with a weak in­
secticidal soap spray; see the caution on page
213 before spraying. Prevent problems by using 
a foil mulch, which keeps aphids from find­
ing plants.
Leaves mottled yellow between veins; leaf 
undersides have purple spots. Cause: Downy 
mildew. As the disease progresses, older leaves 
turn brown and die and younger leaves become 
infected. Treat plants with a dilute solution of 
copper spray to control: see the caution on 
page 213 before spraying. Prevent problems 
by planting tolerant cultivars such as ‘Fanci­
pak', ‘Liberty’, ‘Poinsett 76’, and ‘Slicemaster’.
Leaves with spots, blotches, or brown areas. 
Causes: Powdery mildew; angular leaf spot; 
scab anthracnose. Various diseases attack 
cucumbers. Reduce problems by keeping foliage 
dry when watering and by not touching plants 
when wet. Spray infected plants with a dilute 
solution of copper spray to control outbreaks; 
see the caution on page 213 before spraying.
Powdery white spots on leaves, especially 
on upper surfaces are caused by powdery 
mildew. Prevent problems by planting resistant 
cultivars such as ‘Fancipak’, ‘Liberty’, ‘Poinsett 
76’, and ‘Slicemaster’.
Water-soaked spots that turn gray, die, 
and drop out leaving shotholes are caused by 
angular leaf spot or by scab. Angular leaf spot 
causes small, brown, angular spots on fruit. 
Scab-damaged fruit develops sunken, brown 
spots with a sticky ooze. Scab is worse in cool, 
moist weather. ‘Fancipak’, ‘Score’, and ‘Slice- 
master’ are resistant to scab.
Yellow spots that turn brown are caused 
by anthracnose. Infected leaves eventually die. 
Infected fruit has circular, black, sunken
cankers. Prevent problems by planting culti­
vars, such as ‘Fancipak’, ‘Liberty’, ‘Poinsett 
76’, ‘Score’, and ‘Slicemaster’, that are resistant 
to anthracnose.
Vines wilt suddenly. Cause: Squash vine 
borers. These fat, white, 1" long larvae burrow 
into stems and exude masses of yellow-green, 
sawdustlike excrement. See the illustration of 
this insect and its damage on page 214. Slit 
stems lengthwise above each injury with a 
sharp knife and kill the larvae. Cover cut stems 
with moist soil so stems will form new roots. 
Injecting stems with BTK or parasitic nema­
todes may also help control borers. To reduce 
problems, plant the cultivar ‘Sweet Mama 
Hybrid’, which is resistant to vine borers. Or 
spray the base of stems with BTK once a week 
in late spring and early summer.
Vines wilt at midday, starting with youn­
ger leaves; leaves remain green. Cause: Bac­
terial wilt. See the illustration of disease damage 
on page 148. As the disease progresses, leaves 
fail to recover, and die. Cut wilted stems and 
press out drops of sap. If it is milky, sticky, and 
astringent, your plant is infected. Destroy 
infected plants immediately. Prevent problems 
by controlling cucumber beetles, since they 
spread the disease.
Fruit Problems
Fruit shrivels. Cause: Bacterial wilt. See 
“Vines wilt at midday, starting with younger 
leaves; leaves remain green” above for controls.
Fruit misshapen, one end not Tilled out. 
Causes: Diseases; poor pollination; nutrient 
deficiency. Many diseases cause misshapen 
fruit; use leaf symptoms to determine the dis­
ease causing the problem. If leaves are healthy, 
high temperatures may have damaged pollen, 
or bees may not have been active. Early in the 
season, wait for better conditions, or pollinate 
the flowers yourself by dusting pollen from 
male flowers onto female flowers (see page
214 for an illustration of male and female

86 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
flowers). Later in the season, pull plants and 
wait for second planting to bear. If plants 
appear to be healthy and temperatures are not 
extreme, try spraying plants with compost tea 
to correct possible nutrient deficiency.
Fruit with spots; flesh may rot. Causes: 
Angular leaf spot: Alternaria blight: black 
rot: scab: other fungal or bacterial diseases. 
See “Leaves with spots, blotches, or brown 
areas" on page 85 for controls.
Fruit dull bronze. Cause: Phosphorus 
deficiency. Spray plants with compost tea to 
correct possible nutrient deficiency. Check 
with a soil test and amend soil as needed.
Currant
Ribes spp. (Saxifragaceae)
Currants are upright or spreading, decid­
uous bushes growing 3-5' high. European black 
currants \ Ribes nigrum)bear fruit mostly on 
the previous seasons growth: red and white 
currants (R. petraeum. R. rubrum. and R. 
sativum) bear on the previous seasons growth 
and on spurs—short branches that elongate 
only a fraction of an inch per year—on older 
stems. Currants are hardy in Zones 3-8.
Plant currants in full sun or partial shade 
and apply a thick, organic mulch. To winter- 
prune red and white currants, cut all but 6 of 
the previous season’s shoots to the ground. 
Remove all shoots more than 3 years old. To 
winter-prune black currants, cut 2-5 of the 
oldest branches to the ground and shorten 
tall, old branches to vigorous young sideshoots. 
Most currants are self-pollinating.
Problems
Leaves blistered and reddened. Cause: 
Aphids. You'll find these tiny insects clustered
on leaf undersides. If damage is not severe, 
ignore it; otherwise, spray with insecticidal 
soap, neem, or pyrethrin, making sure to get 
the undersides of the leaves. Dormant oil 
applied in the winter helps prevent aphids.
Leaves yellow; stems die back. Cause: 
Currant borers. As spring growth begins, you 
can easily spot borer-infested canes because 
the leaves look weak and sickly. Currant borers 
spend the winter in canes, pupate in the spring, 
and emerge as moths to reinfect currant bushes. 
The easiest control is to cut out and destroy 
infested canes as soon as you notice them.
Leaves spotted, yellow, and drop early. 
Causes: Septoria leaf spot; anthracnose. Since 
both of these fungal diseases overwinter on 
old leaf litter, rake up the leaves or bury them 
under a thick mulch in autumn. Copper sprays 
also control both diseases. If defoliation occurs 
late in the season, it does plants little harm.
Leaves with rust-colored pustules on under­
sides. Cause: White pine blister rust. This 
fungal disease is passed back and forth between 
white pines (or other 5-needled pines) and var­
ious species of Ribes. The disease is much more 
devastating to pines than to Ribes, so Ribes 
plantings are sometimes banned where pines 
are economically important. European black 
currants are most susceptible. Red and white 
currants generally are not much affected. Avoid 
planting susceptible currants near white pines.
Leaves with white powdery coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. Usually this fungal 
disease is harmless, but if it becomes severe, 
spray plants with sulfur, lime-sulfur, or a solu­
tion of sodium carbonate (washing soda) or 
sodium bicarbonate (baking soda).
Fruit colors and drops early. Cause: Cur­
rant fruit fly larvae. For more information, see 
"Fruit colors and drops early" on page 107.
Foliage stripped from bushes just as leaves 
expand. Cause: Imported currantworms. For 
controls, see “Foliage stripped from bushes 
just as leaves expand" on page 108.

DAHLIA 
■ 
87
Dahlia
Dahlia. Tliberous roots.
Descended from species native to Cen­
tral and South America, modem dahlia hybrids 
are most often grown as annuals in temperate 
climates and are dug, overwintered indoors, 
and replanted the following spring. Thousands 
of cultivars offer a huge array of flower shapes, 
colors, and sizes to gardeners willing to meet 
dahlias’ rigorous growth requirements. Thick- 
stemmed, rather coarse-textured plants range 
from r  to 8' tall; midsummer to fall blossoms 
may be I "-15" in diameter.
Select a planting site in full sun and pre­
pare the soil to a depth of 1\ incorporating 
plenty of compost or other organic matter. 
Dahlias require good drainage; raised beds 
help meet this need. Plant tuberous roots after 
all danger of frost has passed; placing them 
horizontally in the soil with the buds upward 
and fleshy roots spread out in the planting 
hole, 6 "-8" below the soil surface. Cover the 
buds with about 3" of soil at planting, then 
gradually fill in as the shoots grow. All but the 
shortest cultivars need support for heavy flower 
heads. Set stakes at planting time.
Pinching shoots back during the growing 
season promotes bushier growth and increased
flowering; removal of some buds increases 
the size of the remaining flowers. These heavy 
feeders benefit from side-dressings of com­
post or general-purpose fertilizer throughout 
the summer. Avoid high-nitrogen fertilizers, 
which encourage weak growth and pest and 
disease problems. Dahlias need at least 1" of 
water weekly; soil should be neither soggy 
nor completely dry. Mulch to retain moisture.
Dahlias survive winter outdoors in Zones 
9-10, given good drainage; otherwise they must 
be dug and stored. Cut plants back to about 1' 
and dig the roots in fall before the first frost. 
Shake away loose soil and lay roots in the sun 
to dry for several hours. After drying, remove 
the tops and store the roots in a cool, dark, dry 
place. Check roots at regular intervals to make 
sure they’re not so dry that they shrivel up.
Problems
Leaves wilt; stems collapse. Cause: Borers. 
Both European com borer and stalk borer 
caterpillars are long, thin, and striped and 
tunnel within dahlia stems and flower stalks, 
causing collapse. Inspection of damaged plants 
reveals small, round holes in stems. Remove 
and destroy infested stems; clean up debris 
where pests overwinter. If borers have been a 
problem in past years, spray BTK weekly in 
early summer before borers enter stems.
Leaves mottled white or yellow. Cause: 
Leafhoppers. Feeding by wedge-shaped leaf-

88 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLAiNT GL IDE
hoppers gives leaves a speckled appearance, 
followed by dry, brown blotches; foliage be­
comes distorted and falls off. In addition to 
feeding injury, leafhoppers can spread aster 
yellows and other diseases. Encourage natu­
ral predators such as bigeyed bugs and para­
sitic wasps. Spray leafhopper infestations with 
insecticidal soap first: if control is unsatisfactory, 
treat with a commercial neem or pyrethrin 
spray.
Leaves yellow-green or deformed; shoots 
spindly, stunted. Cause: Viral diseases. Sev­
eral viruses infect dahlias, causing stunted 
growth and yellowed leaves with ring spots, 
mottling, and pale or dead areas. Aphids and 
leafhoppers spread viruses; control pests to 
limit infection. Dig and destroy dahlias show­
ing symptoms.
Flowers and foliage with gray mold. 
Cause: Botrytis blight. During wet, cloudy 
weather, Botrytis fungi can cause flowers to 
turn brown and rot. Pick and destroy infected 
plant parts. If blight is a persistent problem, 
apply sprays of bordeaux mix.
Daphne
Daphne. Shrubs.
Daphnes are small evergreen or decidu­
ous shrubs; most produce fragrant flowers. 
They are excellent foundation shrubs.
Daphnes are not the easiest plants to grow; 
there is considerable controversy as to their 
soil preferences. Furthermore, for no known 
reason, plants will occasionally die. Plant them 
in organically enriched soils in sun or light 
shade and be sparing of fertilizer and water. 
Spring planting as container-grown or balled* 
and-burlapped plants suits them best.
Daphnes are little troubled by insects. In
warmer climates scales may be a problem: see 
"Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered with 
small bumps * on page 237.
Delphinium
Delphinium, larkspur. Perennials.
Dense flower spikes of lavender, true blue, 
pink, and white make delphiniums summer 
garden showstoppers. Towering flower stalks 
range in height from l'/i' to 8', depending on 
the cultivar. Large, lobed, and deeply toothed 
leaves cluster near the ground.
Soil for delphiniums must be high in 
organic matter, slightly alkaline, well-drained, 
and moist. Select a site protected from dam­
aging winds, and provide stakes for brittle, 
hollow flower stems. These plants prefer full 
sun, but benefit from afternoon shade where 
summers are long and hot. Delphiniums need 
cool summers and may die during extended 
hot, humid periods. Even under favorable 
conditions, most plantings lose vigor and need 
renovation every 3-5 years.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. See 
“Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; clus­
ters of small insects" on page 177 for controls.
Leaves with tan or brown blotches or ser­
pentine tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. For 
recommended controls, see "Leaves with tan 
or brown blotches or serpentine tunnels’* on 
page 27.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. See "Leaves with large, rag­
ged holes” on page 177 for control information.
Leaves covered with white powder. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. See "Leaves covered with

DIANTHt-S ■ 
89
white powder" on page 177 for controls.
Stems exude sawdustlike material and 
break; leaves wilt. Cause: Borers. Long, thin, 
striped stalk and burdock borers make small 
holes in the base of delphinium stems as they 
enter to feed. Sawdustlike castings around the 
holes mark the presence of these moth larvae. 
Prevent borers by removing weeds and plant 
debris where eggs might overwinter: applica­
tions of BTK give control only if applied just 
as borers are entering plants. You can also con­
trol borers by slitting affected stalks lengthwise, 
removing the borers, and binding the stems 
together—a long task in a large planting.
Leaves stippled, reddish to yellow, with 
fine webbing. Cause: Spider mites. These '/»" 
arachnids quickly disfigure ornamentals. Their 
feeding causes leaves to yellow, dry up, and 
die. Excessive feeding turns foliage almost 
white; fine webs cover leaves and growing 
tips. Mites target water-stressed plants in hot, 
dry weather; adequate watering guards against 
them. Hose down infested plants; a strong 
stream knocks mites off plants, but may dam­
age brittle flower stalks. Introduce predatory 
mites (1.000 per 500 square feet); spray severe 
infestations with avermectins, citrus oils, insec­
ticidal soap. neem. or pyrethrin.
Stems blacken at base; leaves wilt; plant 
falls over. Cause: Crown or root rots. Both 
fungi and bacteria cause crown and root rot of 
delphiniums. Plants may wilt suddenly or yel­
low and wilt slowly. Stems and roots may turn 
black: mold may appear. Poorly drained, overly 
wet soil promotes rot; choose well-drained 
sites and add organic m atter to improve 
drainage. Avoid injury to crowns when dig­
ging near plants; keep winter mulch away from 
crowns. Remove and destroy infected plants; 
wash tools used around diseased plants. Solar­
ize the soil before replanting.
Leaves with yellow, brown, or black spots. 
Cause: Fungi. Several fungi cause spots on 
leaves. As spots enlarge, entire leaves may 
wither. Remove and destroy infected foliage;
space plants to encourage good air circula­
tion: avoid wetting foliage when watering. Dig 
and destroy seriously infected plants. Keep 
garden free of debris, and cut plants to the 
ground at the end of the growing season. Apply 
preventive sulfur sprays if leaf spot is a serious 
problem.
Deutzia
Deutzia. Shrubs.
Deutzias are a group of low-growing, 
deciduous, spring-blooming shrubs of rounded 
form. They are excellent in the shrub border 
or massed as an informal hedge.
Deutzias tolerate virtually any soil in sun 
or very light shade. Set out in spring as bare- 
root. balled-and-burlapped. or container-grown 
plants. They bloom on the previous years 
wood, so prune after blooming, cutting back 
the branches that have flowered.
While deutzias are relatively free of major 
insect problems, aphids may feed on the leaves. 
For controls, see “Leaves wrinkled and discol­
ored" on page 235. Leafminers may occasion­
ally damage the leaves: see "Leaves tunneled" 
on page 237.
Dianthus
Pink, carnation. Perennials.
Sprightly pinks bear fringed flowers in 
shades of pink, white, maroon, and red over 
tidy, gray-green grasslike leaves. Dianthus spp. 
range in height from 4" to 18" with spreads of

90 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PI ANT Gl'IDF.
1-2'; most bloom profusely from late spring 
through summer. Popular species include sweet 
William ID. barbatus), a short-lived perennial 
often grown as an annual, and mat-forming 
maiden pinks (D. deltoides).
Well-drained, average soil with neutral to 
! 
slightly alkaline pH is best for pinks. Most 
prefer full sun. but tolerate light shade, espe­
cially where summer temperatures are high. 
Pinks may decline in the heat of summer; 
select heat-resistant cultivars for southern 
gardens. Avoid overwatering but don't let plants 
wilt from drought stress. Cut plants back at 
the end of the blooming season to encourage 
new growth. Rejuvenate plantings by dividing 
them every 2-3 years.
Problems
Leaves stippled, reddish to yellow, with 
fine webbing. Cause: Spider mites. These '/so" 
arachnids quickly disfigure ornamentals. Their 
feeding on the undersides of foliage causes it 
to yellow, dry up. and die; excessive feeding 
turns foliage almost white, and fine webs cover 
leaves and growing tips. Mites seek out water- 
stressed plants in hot, dry weather: adequate 
watering helps prevent infestations. Hose down 
plants when symptoms first appear; a strong 
stream knocks mites off plants and may give 
sufficient control. Introduce predatory mites 
(1,000 per 500 square feet); spray severe infes­
tations with avermectins, citrus oils, insectici­
dal soap, neem, or pyrethrin.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. Also 
known as plant lice, tiny aphids damage plants 
by sucking sap from leaves, stems, and buds.
In addition, aphids transmit viruses that can 
injure plants long after the pests are vanquished. 
Use a strong spray of water to knock aphids 
off plants, or apply insecticidal soap sprays. 
Encourage natural predators such as lady bee­
tles and lacewings. Treat severe problems with 
a commercial neem spray or pyrethrin spray 
or dust.
Leaves and flowers greenish yellow, dis­
torted; new growth spindly. Cause: Viruses. 
Several viruses may infect pinks, stunting growth 
and mottling and spotting foliage. Control 
aphids and leafhoppers that spread viruses: 
there is no cure for infected plants. Remove 
and destroy plants with viral symptoms; don’t 
compost diseased materials.
Leaf surfaces pale; powdery orange spots 
beneath. Cause: Rust. This fungus sometimes 
bothers sweet Williams, deforming leaves and 
stems and causing early leaf drop. Its orange 
spots release fungal spores that spread via 
wind and rain. Avoid wetting foliage when 
watering and encourage good air circulation. 
In problem areas, apply wettable sulfur sev­
eral weeks before rust normally appears. 
Remove infected plant parts; clear debris from 
the garden in the fall.
Plant wilts; stems rot at soil level. Cause: 
Fungal or bacterial rots. Pinks are susceptible 
to various diseases that cause plants to will 
suddenly or to rot at or below the soil surface. 
This is especially true of plants growing in wet 
or poorly drained soil or in crowded conditions. 
Prevent problems by planting in well-drained 
sites, and avoid overwatering and overcrowd­
ing: keep mulch away from stem bases. Remove 
and destroy infected plants; do not compost 
diseased materials. If the problem is serious, 
solarize the soil before replanting a site.
Dicentra
Bleeding heart. Perennials.
These graceful plants carry prolific stems 
of dainty, heart-shaped flowers. Common bleed­
ing heart (Dicentra spectabilis) is a Japanese 
native with dangling, pink and white blooms 
in late spring to early summer; native fringed

DIGITALIS ■ 
91
bleeding heart (D. eximia) bears pink or white 
blossoms on 1' spikes throughout the summer. 
Plants range from 1' to 3' in height and spread. 
Medium green leaves are fernlike.
Plant bleeding hearts in moist, rich, and 
well-drained soil under light shade. Plants tol­
erate full sun only where summers are cool. 
Avoid sites with standing water, an invitation 
to stem rot. Mark the spot where you plant 
bleeding heart’s fleshy roots—common bleed­
ing heart foliage may die back after blooming 
and all species disappear in winter. Plant bleed­
ing heart roots 2 'apart and don’t disturb them; 
roots are brittle and do not transplant or divide 
easily. Few pests or diseases pose serious trou­
ble for well-grown bleeding hearts.
Problems
Stems blacken at base; leaves wilt; plant 
falls over. Causes: Wilts; stem rots. Many 
destructive fungi live in soil and will attack 
plants at soil level. Plants may wilt suddenly 
or yellow and wilt slowly. Stems and roots may 
turn black; mold may appear. Discolored, water- 
soaked lesions girdle stems; plants gradually 
die. Poorly drained, overly wet soil promotes 
wilt and rot; choose well-drained sites and 
add organic matter to improve drainage. Avoid 
overwatering and overcrowding; keep mulch 
away from the base of stems. Remove and 
destroy infected plants; wash tools used around 
diseased plants.
Digitalis
Foxglove. Perennials.
Common foxgloves (Digitalis purpurea) 
are actually biennials that self-sow so well 
that they function as perennials. Bell-like flow­
ers in shades of purple, pink, and white cover
2-5' spires in late spring. Large, coarse, dark 
green leaves cluster near the plant's base. 
True perennial species are available, but their 
blooms are fewer and less showy than com­
mon foxglove's.
Foxgloves enjoy a shady site with rich, 
moist, well-drained, slightly acidic soil. Plants 
tolerate full sun, but favor cool weather and 
need shade in extreme summer heat. Water 
regularly to maintain soil moisture. Stake tall 
cultivars to support flower spikes; plant in a 
sheltered site. Remove foxgloves after they 
have set seed and self-sown next year’s crop. 
Cutting flowers before they set seed promotes 
second-year blooms, but flowering is reduced 
the second year.
Problems
Leaves and/or flowers with holes. Cause: 
Japanese beetles. These pests can seriously 
damage foxglove foliage; see “Leaves and/or 
flowers with holes’’ on page 176 for control 
information.
Leaves covered with white powder. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. For information on control­
ling this common and troublesome fungal dis­
ease, see “Leaves covered with white powder’’ 
on page 177.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. Slugs and snails may hide 
below foxgloves’ low, broad foliage. Limit them 
by removing faded leaves and plant debris. 
See “Leaves with large, ragged holes’’ on page 
177 for more control information.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Foxglove 
aphids. These pests feed on other plants but 
overwinter as eggs on foxgloves. Good gar­
dening practices will slow the spread of fox­
glove aphids. Remove spent plants in fall to 
reduce aphid activity in following years. See 
“Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects” on page 177 for 
controls.

92 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PI ANT GUIDE
Dill
Anethum graveolens (Umbelliferae)
Dill is an annual herb grown for its tangy 
leaves and seeds. Sow seed outdoors where 
the plants are to grow after the soil is warm. 
Dill prefers a site in full sun with rich, well-
drained. moist soil and a pH between 5.0 and 8.0.
Dill is rarely troubled by pests or diseases. 
Virus-infected leaves are dwarfed and deformed 
and abnormally colored. Destroy infected 
plants and control leafhoppers as they spread 
viruses. Leaf blight causes dark spots with 
yellow edges. To control this fungal disease, 
spray plants with fish emulsion or in severe 
cases, with sulfur. See the Herbs entry begin­
ning on page 116 for other possible problems.
Echinacea
Purple coneflower. Perennials.
Purple, daisylike petals surround the 
prickly, brown centers of purple coneflowers 
(Echinacea purpurea) I "-4" wide blossoms. 
Plants grow 3-4' tall and bloom from early 
summer until frost. The cone-shaped centers 
persist throughout the winter, providing inter­
est after the petals have fallen. Pale cone­
flower (£. pallida) has creamy white petals.
These durable prairie natives like full sun, 
but endure poor soils and tolerate some drought 
once established. Shaded sites cause tall, spin­
dly growth, as docs excess fertilization. Pinch 
in spring to encourage sturdy, branching growth. 
Coneflowers are somewhat short-lived: divide 
clumps every 3 years or so to rejuvenate 
plantings, placing divisions 20" apart. Plants 
also start easily from seeds, which need light 
to germinate.
Japanese beetles can quickly skeletonize 
the foliage of purple coneflowers. See “Leaves 
and/or flowers with holes” on page 176 for 
controls.
Copyrighted matelial

EGGP1ANT ■ 
93
Eggplant
Solatium tnekmgem vac escukntum (Solanaceae)
Eggplants are tender perennials that are 
grown as annuals in temperate regions for the 
firm-fleshed fruit. Fruit shapes range from long 
and thin to short and blocky and may be 
white, yellow, or dark purple. Harvest fruit at 
any size, preferably before seeds turn brown 
and harden.
Culture
Eggplants do best in full sun and well- 
drained. fertile soil with lots of organic matter. 
They prefer a pH between 6.0 and 6.8, but will 
tolerate a pH as low as 5.5. Eggplants need a 
high level of nitrogen and moderate levels of 
phosphorus and potassium. Have the soil tested 
and correct any deficiencies. They grow best 
at temperatures between 70° and 85°F and 
poorly above 95° or below 65°E
Eggplants need lots of water. Keep the 
soil evenly moist, and never let it dry out. 
They do well in mulched, raised beds with 
drip irrigation. Black plastic mulch is a good 
choice because it warms the soil.
Purchase stocky, insect- and disease-free 
plants, or start your own from seed indoors. 
Soaking seed in 122°F water for 30 minutes 
before planting can help reduce seed-borne 
diseases. (Be aware that this treatment can 
damage seed viability; for complete instruc­
tions, see page 422.) Eggplant seeds germinate 
best between 80° and 90°E Once seedlings are 
up, they grow best at 70°F Do not plant out 
before average daily temperatures have reached 
65°-70°F Protect transplants from wind, and 
water new transplants well with seaweed extract 
or compost tea to give them a good start. 
Spray plants with seaweed extract with 1 tea­
spoon of Epsom salts added per gallon when 
the first flowers open to improve fruit set.
Eggplants are susceptible to many of the 
same problems, pests, and diseases as toma­
toes, including flower drop or misshapen fruit 
due to extreme temperatures, flea beetles, 
Colorado potato beetles, aphids, hornworms, 
mites, Verticillium and Fusarium wilts, tobacco 
mosaic virus, and anthracnose fruit rot. See 
the Tomato entry beginning on page 227 for 
symptoms, causes, and controls.
Prevent problems by planting tobacco 
mosaic virus-tolerant cultivars such as ‘Black- 
nite’, ‘Classy Chassis’, ‘Dusky Hybrid', ‘Epic’, 
and ‘Vernal*.
Problems
Leaves turn yellow, then brown. Cause: 
Lace bugs. Leaves eventually die. These flat, 
gray to brown. V\o” long insects have lacelike 
wings and feed on the undersides of leaves. 
Treat plants with a commercial pyrethrin spray 
or dust if damage is severe. Prevent problems 
by covering plants with row cover until they 
flower.
Leaves with large holes. Cause: Blister 
beetles. These 7 /' long, elongated beetles have 
yellow and black stripes. Wear gloves to 
handpick. since these beetles secrete a sub­
stance that may cause blisters. Blister beetle 
larvae help control grasshoppers, so think twice 
before spraying to control them. Treat plants 
with a commercial pyrethrin spray or dust if 
damage is severe.
Leaves with light-centered, gray to brown 
spots; fruit with pale, sunken spots. Cause: 
Phomopsis blight. Stems may also develop 
dark areas. Fruit spots enlarge and run together, 
affected flesh is discolored and may rot and 
shrivel. Spray plants with copper if symptoms 
are present and if weather is wet or humid. 
Prevent problems by planting resistant culti­
vars like ‘Florida Beauty’ and ‘Florida Market’.

94 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Fruit with dry, brown chew marks. Cause: 
Colorado potato beetles. See "Leaves with 
large, ragged holes or leaves missing" on page 
190 for description and controls.
Epimedium
Epimedium. Perennials.
These 6"-12" tall, evergreen to semi- 
evergreen plants bear clusters of V<", yellow, 
white, or pink flowers in early spring. Com­
pound leaves consist of 2"-3" long, heart-shaped 
leaflets, tinged pink or red in spring and turn­
ing yellow or bronze in fall.
Epimediums are slow to establish, but 
can form a hardy groundcover for moist, par­
tially shaded locations and will grow in sites 
where low soil fertility limits other perennials. 
Cut foliage low to the ground in early spring to 
keep it from hiding the flowers.
Like most groundcovers, epimediums offer 
a haven for slugs and snails. See “Leaves with 
large, ragged holes” on page 177 for controls.
Euonymus
Euonymus, spindle tree. TVees, shrubs, and vines.
Euonymus are evergreen or deciduous 
trees, shrubs, or vines, always with opposite 
leaves and generally with toothed leaves. 
Shrubby species are good for hedges or speci­
men plants; vining species are great as ground­
covers or on walls.
Set euonymus out in spring or fall as balled- 
and-burlapped or container-grown plants. The 
plants are tolerant of sun or shade, but heavy 
shade may decrease fruiting.
Problems
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. Scale insects 
are the most common insect pests on euony­
mus plants. See the opposite page for an illus­
tration of euonymus scale and its damage. For 
control measures, see “Leaves yellow; stems 
and leaves covered with small bumps" on 
page 237.
Trunk or roots with swollen, wartlike 
growths. Cause: Crown gall. For an illustra­
tion of this bacterial disease, see the opposite 
page. For controls, see “Trunk or roots with 
swollen, wartlike growths” on page 238.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves wrinkled and discolored” 
on page 235 for controls.
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac­
nose. See the opposite page for an illustration 
of this disease. For control measures, see 
“Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots” on page 238.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with pow­
dery white coating” on page 237 for controls.
Euphorbia
Spurge. Perennials.
The species of perennial Euphorbia range 
in size from prostrate myrtle euphorbia (£. 
myrsinites) to 1-l'/i', clump-forming cushion

EUPHORBIA ■ 
95
A What Goes Wrong 
and Why
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves 
with moist or brown, sunken spots.
Cause: Anthracnose. Spots enlarge 
and run together as the disease 
progresses.
Trunk or roots with swollen, 
w artlike growths. Cause:
Galls also form on stems; can be several 
inches in diameter.
Leaves yellow; stem s and leaves 
covered with small bumps.
Cause: Euonymus scale. Infested 
plants weaken and yellow.
spurge (£. epithymoides) to 2-3' tall Griffith’s 
spurge {£. griffithii). Brightly colored flowers, 
actually showy bracts, bring shades of yellow 
and red-orange to the garden from early spring 
through summer, depending on the species. 
Plants remain attractive after bracts have faded; 
some offer red fall color. Also characteristic 
of this genus is milky sap that can cause skin 
irritation and burning; wear gloves when han­
dling spurges and avoid contact with the sap.
Spurges prefer full sun and well-drained, 
moist soil, but may become invasive under 
these ideal conditions. In southern zones, they 
need partial shade during the heat of summer 
to prevent leggy, open growth. Spurges don’t 
mind average to poor soil and most tolerate
some drought. Divide vigorously growing plants 
every 2-3 years to check their spread, being 
sure to leave solid roots on each division.
Problems
Plant wilting. Cause: Lettuce root 
aphids. Usually sturdy and resistant to most 
pests, spurge is only occasionally infested by tiny 
white to yellow insects that feed underground 
on its roots as well as those of lettuce. Remove 
weeds to prevent aphids from multiplying in 
early spring. Add compost to soil to encour­
age beneficial nematodes, ground beetles, and 
other soil predators. Improve watering to help 
plants withstand root damage. In severe cases, 
drench the soil around spurges with neem.

96 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Fagus
Beech. Trees.
Beeches are deciduous trees with gray 
bark and alternate leaves. They are one of the 
finest specimen trees for large landscapes. 
They do not, however, thrive on city conditions, 
and their spreading growth and extensive sur­
face roots make it virtually impossible to grow 
other plants beneath them.
Set out balled-and-burlapped plants in 
spring in well-drained, evenly moist soil. Full 
sun is best but they'll tolerate part shade. 
Beeches are very sensitive to root zone 
disturbances—cuts, fills, compaction—so keep 
them safe from such abuse. A thick layer of 
organic mulch will protect the shallow roots 
and help keep them cool and moist.
Problems
Leaves skeletonized. Causes: Canker- 
worms: other caterpillars. Cankerworms are 
W '-l", yellow, green, or brown caterpillars 
that feed on beech leaves, often defoliating 
the tree. To avoid this problem, apply a band 
of sticky coating, such as Tanglefoot, around 
the base of the tree in spring to keep females 
from climbing up and laying their eggs. Apply 
fresh coats in September and February to trap
both spring and fall cankerworms. If their 
feeding becomes a problem, spray leaves with 
BTK as soon as you notice the pests: continue 
every 2 weeks until they are gone.
Several other caterpillars, including gypsy 
moths, loopers, and tent caterpillars, feed on 
beeches. See “Leaves skeletonized or with large 
holes; branches may be webbed” and “Plant 
defoliated" on page 236 for more information 
and controls.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. See “Trunk 
or branches with small holes; limbs die or 
break off* on page 238 for controls.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. A number 
of scale insects attack beeches, including the 
white-colored beech scale. Note that beeches 
may be damaged by applications of dormant 
oil; instead, spray lime-sulfur on the trunk 
and branches in late winter. For other controls, 
see “Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps” on page 237.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. Bleed­
ing canker is spread by the beech scale, which 
feeds on the bark, causing wounds that permit 
entry of the fungus. Control the insect and 
you 11 prevent the disease. For more details on 
dealing with canker, see “Trunk or branches 
with oozing lesions; branch tips die back" on 
page 238.
Copyrighted matejial

FIG 
■ 
97
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See "Leaves wrinkled and discolored" 
on page 235 for controls.
Leaves with powdery white coating.
Cause: Powdery mildew. See "Leaves with pow­
dery white coating" on page 237 for controls.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See "Leaves with spots” on page 237 for controls.
Fig
Ficus carica (Moraceae)
Figs are deciduous, subtropical trees or 
bushes that grow 10-30' tall and bear fruit on
1- and 2-year-old wood. They are hardy in 
Zones 8-10.
Fig trees need abundant sunlight but tol­
erate of a wide range of soil types. In colder 
areas, plant figs against a wall or wrap them 
for the winter to minimize dieback from cold. 
Each winter, head back long branches to main­
tain tree shape and induce vigorous new growth. 
Thin out crowded, weak, diseased, or crossed 
branches. Cultivars such as ‘Celeste’ and 
‘Mission’, which fruit best on last year’s wood, 
should be pruned more lightly than cultivars 
such as ‘Magnolia’ and ‘Kadota’, which fruit 
heavily on new growth. Some figs need cross- 
pollination: others develop fruit without 
pollination. Check pollination needs before 
buying plants.
Fruit Problems
Fruit soured, mushy, or smutty. Cause: 
Sour bugs. These small black beetles crawl 
into the eye of fruit and lay eggs that hatch 
into white grubs. The grubs carry bacteria 
that cause figs to turn sour, mushy, or smutty. 
Soured fruit may have a drop of pink, sticky
fluid at its eye and a fermented odor. Smut 
produces dusty black spores. To prevent sour 
bug damage, grow closed-eye cultivars such 
as ‘Brown Turkey’, ‘Celeste’, ‘Green Ischia’, 
and ‘Mission’. Clean up fallen fruit, which 
attracts beetles, and trap beetles in containers 
of fermenting fruit.
Fruit with ants inside. Cause: Insect 
feeding. Ants enter the fruit eye to feed on 
ripe fruit. To thwart ants, band stems with 
plastic or heavy paper coated with sticky 
material. Or place ant bait stations containing 
boric acid around trees. Wood ashes around 
the base of trees also helps prevent ants from 
climbing up to fruit.
Leaf and Branch Problems
Leaves with raised, rusty spots on under­
sides. Cause: Rust. Leaves may yellow and 
die. To control this fungal disease, rake up 
and destroy fallen leaves. Where the problem 
is severe, spray with copper.
Leaves spotted. Cause: Leaf blight. Var­
ious fungal diseases attack fig leaves and twigs. 
Control all these conditions by raking up and 
destroying fallen leaves and fruit. Also prune 
plants to remove infected twigs and allow sun­
light to reach inner branches.
Whole Plant Problems
Whole plant lacking vigor; bumps on twigs 
and leaves. Causes: Scales; nematodes. Scales 
look like yellow, gray, white, or reddish or 
purplish brown bumps that you can scrape off 
stems or leaves with your fingernail. Many 
natural enemies, including lady beetles and 
chalcid wasps, help keep scales in check. Prune 
off heavily infested branches and destroy them. 
For serious infestations, spray before growth 
begins with dormant oil.
Nematodes are soil-dwelling, microscopic 
worms. Some nematodes perform helpful tasks, 
such as breaking down organic matter; others 
attack plant roots and cause diseaselike

98 
■ 
PROBIJ-M-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
symptoms. Figs grown in sandy soils are espe­
cially susceptible to nematode infestation. If 
you have sandy soil, plant your fig tree near a 
building and apply a thick, organic mulch. 
Both of these strategies seem to deter nema­
todes. If nematodes are common in your area, 
solarize the soil for 1 or 2 months during the 
summer before planting figs. Planting a cover 
crop of French dwarf marigolds or African 
marigolds or adding chitin to the soil also 
helps control nematodes. ‘Celeste' and ‘Hunt' 
are 2 nematode-resistant cultivars.
Filbert
Corylus avellam, C. americana 
(Betulaceae)
Filberts grow as deciduous trees or shrubs 
reaching about 20'. They are hardy in Zones
4-8. To set nuts, most filbert cultivars need 
cross-pollination with a second cultivar.
Filberts blossom very early in the spring, 
so they need a site not prone to spring frosts. 
Plant in full sun. Since plants blossom on last 
year’s wood, annual pruning is needed to stim­
ulate current season’s growth, which will bear 
next year’s nuts.
Problems
Nut kernels blackened; nut shell has small 
hole. Cause: Filbertworms. These are the lar­
vae of a brown moth. The easiest control is to 
keep trees free of ground debris, such as leaves, 
fallen nuts, and shells, because the larvae pupate 
on the ground throughout the winter.
New leaves twisted or curled and covered 
with a sticky coating. Cause: Aphids. Look 
on leaf undersides for clusters of these tiny 
black insects. Leaves also may be covered 
with a black fungus, called sooty mold, which
feeds on honeydew secreted by these pests. 
R>r information on controlling aphids, see “New 
leaves twisted or curled and covered with a 
sticky coating’’ on page 67.
Flower buds swollen. Cause: Bud mites. 
Infected flowers don’t produce nuts. Plant 
resistant cultivars, including ‘B arcelona’, 
‘Cosford’, ‘Italian Red’, and ‘Purple Aveline’. 
In severe cases, spray trees with superior oil 
around May when the mites crawl out of the 
swollen buds to attack healthy buds.
Branches blighted. Causes: Eastern fil­
bert blight; western filbert blight. Eastern blight 
has no cure. It is present in the East and 
carried on American filberts. Young branches 
are destroyed first, then older branches and 
the trunk, without killing the roots. American 
filberts have some tolerance for the fungus, so 
they have been used in breeding with other 
filbert species in an attempt to create disease- 
resistant plants bearing high-quality nuts.
In the Pacific Northwest, blight is caused 
by western filbert blight, a bacterial disease. 
Small, angular spots appear on leaves, water- 
soaked at first, then turning reddish brown. 
Cankers form on branches, which then may 
die. Control this blight by preventing sunburn 
and winter injury, especially on young plants, 
which are most susceptible. On older plants, 
only smaller twigs die. Spray with copper and 
prune out infected twigs in winter.
Forsythia
Forsythia Shrubs.
Forsythia is the most well-known spring- 
flowering, deciduous shrub. It is effective as a 
hedge, grouped for landscape accent, or in a 
shrub border.

FRITILLARIA 
■ 
99
Set out in spring or fall as bare-root or 
balled-and-burlapped plants. They require at 
least partial sun but flourish in almost any 
soil. Right after bloom, cut out some of the 
oldest canes to maintain strong flowering.
Forsythias are troubled little by insects. 
Crown gall may be a problem; see “Trunk 
or roots with swollen, wartlike growths" on 
page 238.
Fraxinus
Ash. Trees.
Ashes are deciduous trees with opposite, 
compound leaves that turn yellow to purple in 
the fall. Male and female flowers may appear 
on the same or different trees; all-male trees 
are preferred for landscaping since they don't 
produce undesirable seedlings. Ashes are used 
as street trees or specimens for large properties.
Set out trees in spring or fall. Full sun is 
best; the soil should be deep and moist but 
well-drained. Although often found growing 
along streams, ashes tolerate dry conditions 
and a range of soil pH. Vigorously growing 
ashes are fairly trouble-free.
Problems
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. Probably 
the most serious pests of ash are scale insects, 
with oystershell scale as the most important, 
especially in the Midwest. Putnam scale, San 
Jose scale, and soft scale (in warmer climates) 
also occur. R>r control information, see “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. See “Trunk
or branches with small holes; limbs die or 
break off' on page 238 for controls.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
For control information, see “Leaves skele­
tonized or with large holes; branches may be 
webbed" on page 236.
Branches with small masses of galls. 
Cause: Ash flower gall mites. These tiny mites 
attack male flower clusters on white ash 
(Fraxinusamericana). Infested flowers develop 
abnormally, producing galls that dry and remain 
on the tree. Spray branches and galls with 
dormant oil in late winter for control.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots” on page 237 for details.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
“Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; branch 
tips die back” on page 238 for controls.
Leaves distorted, orange-yellow spots on 
leaf undersides. Cause: Rust. This fungus pro­
duces orange pustules, distorting the leaves 
and making branch tips swell. Rust usually 
doesn’t harm the tree much, except for detract­
ing from the appearance. Clean up and destroy 
fallen leaves and branches in autumn. To pre­
vent the spread of mild infections, spray leaves 
with sulfur early in the season.
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Sawflies. See 
“Leaves skeletonized” on page 236 for controls.
Fritillaria
Fritillarv. Bulbs.
Red, orange, or yellow, bell-shaped blooms 
hang downward in groups of 8-10 from crown 
imperial's (Fritillaria imperialis) 3' tall flower 
stalks. Smaller checkered lilies (F meleagris)
Copyrighted material

100 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
bear individual purplish flowers, marked with 
a checkerboard of dark purple on 1' stems. 
Both the bulbs and the lance-shaped, dark 
green foliage have a musky odor that is reputed 
to discourage rodents.
Plant bulbs in early autumn as soon as 
they are available. Handle carefully to avoid 
bruising, and don’t let them dry out before 
planting. Set bulbs 6" deep in humus-rich, 
moist, very well drained soil under partial 
shade. Plants bloom in early spring; choose a 
site that offers protection from late frosts. 
Water during bloom. Well-grown fritillaries 
are troubled by few pests or diseases.
Fruit
Unlike vegetable crops, which share many 
of the same pests, fruit crops are affected by a 
wide variety of insects and diseases. Because 
fruit crops are borne on so many types of 
plants—including fruit trees, berry bushes, 
vines, and herbaceous plants such as straw­
berries—they have a wide range of cultural 
requirements as well. However, regardless of 
the crop you are growing, there are basic steps 
you can take to help prevent and control insects 
and diseases.
Site Selection
Full sun is a must for nearly all fruit crops; 
Even 1 or 2 hours of shade a day may result in 
smaller crops and less-flavorful fruit. Well- 
drained soil is also essential. In sites where 
drainage is a problem, plant in raised beds.
A location near the top of a gentle slope 
is ideal for fruit growing. A north-facing slope 
will help delay spring flowering, which is a
plus in areas where frost damage is common. 
Planting about 15' from the north side of a 
building also helps delay flowering. To help 
protect winter-tender trees, look for a shel­
tered site on the south side of a building.
Avoid planting in frost pockets where late 
spring frosts may damage blossoms and early 
fall freezes may shorten the harvest season. 
Frost pockets develop because cold air tends 
to sink and collects in depressions. Frost pock­
ets occur at the bottom of valleys and on the 
uphill side of woods or buildings on slopes. If 
your whole property is a frost pocket, try train­
ing trees taller so they can blossom above the 
frost pocket, and try planting hardier cultivars.
While good air circulation helps reduce 
disease problems, blustery winds in open areas 
or on hilltops can make training difficult, knock 
fruit off trees early, or topple trees altogether. 
To encourage air movement, space plants far 
enough apart so they won’t grow into each 
other or nearby plants.
Fruit Selection
Fruit trees and berry bushes are a long­
term investment. Before you plant, learn about 
the types of fruit suitable to the local climate 
and soil type. Look for cultivars that will toler­
ate local conditions. Northern gardeners should 
choose cultivars that will survive winter cold, 
blossom late enough to escape late spring 
frosts, yet still set and mature fruit before the 
end of the growing season. Southern garden­
ers need cultivars that will tolerate intense 
summer heat and humidity and don’t require 
much of a winter chilling period. If available, 
disease-resistant cultivars are desirable.
It’s a good idea to consult nearby nurseries, 
botanical gardens, and fruit hobbyists—as well 
as local orchardists and extension agents—for 
information on growing fruit in your area. 
The more you know about local problems 
affecting fruits, the better your chances for 
selecting the right cultivars.

FRUIT ■ 
101
Almost all fruit trees and many grape 
vines are grafted onto a rootstock selected for 
strong rooting characteristics, disease resis­
tance, or dwarfing effect. Many nurseries only 
offer 1 or 2 rootstocks that grow moderately 
well in a wide range of conditions. Some mail­
order nurseries, however, offer a selection of 
rootstocks for the same fruit cultivars. Once 
you have identified a specific rootstock that 
should do well in your conditions, you may 
want to look for a source that carries it.
Some fruit trees come grafted on root­
stocks that produce dwarf, semi-dwarf, and 
standard-size trees. Most home gardeners pre­
fer dwarf or semi-dwarf trees, which fruit at a 
younger age than standard trees and are eas­
ier to tend.
Setting Fruit
When selecting fruit trees, it's important 
to understand their pollination requirements. 
Many fruit tree cultivars will only set fruit if 
the flowers receive pollen from a different but 
compatible cultivar. For example, ‘Red Deli­
cious apples are self-unfruitful, meaning ‘Red 
Delicious trees can’t pollinate one another, 
although they are good pollinators for other 
cultivars. On the other hand, ‘Winesap’ apples 
are not only self-unfruitful, they're also unable 
to pollinate other cultivars. To get fruit from a 
self-unfruitful plant, you need to plant another 
suitable cultivar for cross-pollination. ‘Golden 
Delicious is both self-pollinating (self-fruitful) 
and a good pollinator for other apples— 
including ‘Winesap’ and ‘Red Delicious’.
Reputable nurseries will describe polli­
nation requirements and suggest suitable pol­
linators. Most apples, pears, sweet cherries, 
and Japanese plums require cross-pollination 
to set a good crop. Most peaches, apricots, 
sour cherries, and some European plums are 
self-fruitful, although they often bear more 
heavily if cross-pollinated. Not all cultivars 
are compatible, so check with your supplier.
Planting
Proper planting will encourage healthy, 
vigorous plants that resist attack by insects 
and diseases. Choose your location and pre­
pare the planting site before the plants arrive. 
Test the soil and amend as needed. Work lots 
of organic matter into the top 6"-8" of soil, 
and remove all perennial weeds.
Most fruit plants are shipped bare-root 
and dormant. As soon as they arrive, inspect 
them for damage like broken roots or branches. 
Keep plants cool and the roots moist, but not 
wet. until you can plant them.
Dig a hole large enough in which to spread 
out the roots without cramping them. Cut 
back any damaged roots and shorten unusu­
ally long ones, if necessary. Most plants should 
be planted the same level at which they were 
growing in the nursery. Plant grafted trees 
with the graft union (which looks like an angle 
or an enlarged section near the base of the 
trunk) at least 1" above the soil line. Excep­
tions to this rule may be noted in special 
instructions supplied with the plant.
Refill the hole with the soil you had 
removed, and water the plant well to give the 
plant a good start. Stake or trellis as needed to 
prevent damage, and reduce disease by encour­
aging good air circulation around the branches 
and between plants. Mulch to keep weeds 
under control, supply a slow release of organic 
matter, and conserve soil moisture.
Protect your new trees by painting the 
trunks with white latex paint diluted with an 
equal amount of water to prevent sunscald. 
Frustrate gnawing rodents by placing a 1' high, 
V/' hardware cloth guard around the trunk, 
sunk into the soil 1".
Pruning and Training
Fruit trees are pruned to develop strong 
branches, to remove dead or damaged growth, 
and to allow more air and sunlight into the

102 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PIANT GUIDE
Open center (left) and central leader (right) are 2 ways to train fruit 
trees to obtain maximum yield and exposure to sunlight. The best 
method depends on the growth habit of your fruit tree. In general, to 
improve tree health and performance, also remove any crossing 
branches, water sprouts, crown or root suckers, diseased or broken 
branches, or limbs that emerge at a narrow crotch angle.
center of the plant to help prevent disease and 
insect problems. Pruning and training also 
help control size and encourage sturdy, well­
spaced branches with wide crotch angles.
Start training trees as soon as they are 
planted. Prune off any damaged branches and 
any that are growing at a narrow angle to the 
trunk. Let the rest of the branches grow for a 
full year before starting to select your main 
branches.
It's important to establish sturdy, well-
placed main branches while trees are young. 
Training can reduce the upward growth (affect­
ing the amount of pruning you need to do) 
and will stimulate early fruit bearing. Train 
young branches to grow at a wide angle (about 
45 degrees) by clamping a clip clothespin to 
the trunk just above each branch while they 
are still green and malleable. Older branches 
can also be spread, but with more difficulty. 
Use 1 -2' long boards with a notch in each end 
and brace them between the trunk and the
•pyrighted m

FRUIT ■ 
103
branch. or tie the branch to a weight (such as a 
rock) or the trunk. Gradually spread the branch 
during the season by moving the brace or 
tightening the string.
Prune apples, pears, grapes, and berries 
in late winter or early spring before they break 
dormancy. Prune peaches, plums, and cher­
ries just after the buds burst in the spring, 
when they are less prone to canker infection. 
Remove dead and diseased branches on all 
kinds of fruit-bearing plants if they appear 
during the growing season. Summer pruning 
is also useful for controlling the growth of 
overly vigorous trees, as it stimulates less 
regrowth than dormant pruning does. Do not 
prune after August; fall pruning can increase 
the risk of winter injury.
There are 2 general types of pruning cuts: 
heading and thinning. Cutting a branch back 
partway to shorten it is a heading cut. Head­
ing back a branch tends to encourage a flush 
of new shoots to sprout near the cut end. This 
is a useful technique for stimulating new 
branches when necessary, but too many head­
ing cuts can cause overgrown, overly bushy 
trees. A thinning cut is used to remove a branch 
altogether by cutting it back to a main or side 
branch. Thinning encourages the remaining 
branch to grow, and unlike a heading cut. does 
not stimulate new ones to sprout. For this 
reason, thinning cuts are the best choice for 
developing an open framework and a sturdy, 
compact tree.
Fruit trees are usually trained and pruned 
into one of two general shapes: open center or 
central leader, which are illustrated on the 
opposite page. Modified central leader is inter­
mediate between the two. The individual fruit 
tree entries include training recommenda­
tions. Grapes are usually trained on a trellis 
or arbor. Berry plants are thinned out in the 
appropriate season. There are a number of 
good references on page 493 that will give
you complete, easy-to-follow instructions for 
pruning and training whatever type of fruit- 
bearing plants you choose.
Thinning
Fruit trees often set more fruit than they 
can ripen. Resulting fruit will be small and the 
excess weight can damage branches. Crowded 
fruit is also more susceptible to fungal diseases. 
Thin early in the season when fruit is as small 
as possible. First, clip or twist off all insect- 
damaged or deformed fruit. Then, remove the 
smaller fruit, leaving the biggest and best.
Space fruit so it will not touch each other 
as it grows. If you cant reach the upper limbs, 
tap them with a padded pole to shake loose 
some of the extras.
Preventive Care
Many disease and insect problems can be 
controlled or greatly reduced by simple sani­
tation. Clean up and dispose of branches after 
you prune, especially when removing diseased 
wood. Many insects pupate in the soil or in 
loose bark or dead plant debris. For this reason, 
rake and remove fallen leaves in fall. Also 
remove dropped fruit during the season and 
dry, diseased fruit < known as mummies) cling­
ing to the branches after harvest. Inspecting 
bark in the winter and removing and destroy­
ing egg masses is also effective.
Its a good idea to find out what insects 
and diseases may attack your plants. Inspect 
plants regularly and control problems before 
they get out of hand. When problems do arise, 
start with the most environmentally gentle con­
trols, such as handpicking. pruning, releasing 
predatory insects, or using mating disruption. 
Then move on to superior oil, insecticidal 
soap, BT, or sulfur. Use botanical pesticides, 
such as neem or pyrethrin, or copper com­
pounds, only as a last resort after you have 
tried other less-toxic methods.

104 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Garlic
AUium sativum and A ophioscorodoti ( Liliaceae)
Garlic is a perennial herb grown for its 
pungent bulbs and greens. It is easy to grow 
healthy, trouble-free garlic. Plant cloves in the 
fall and cover with mulch after the weather 
turns cold. Garlic prefers full sun and rich, 
deep, moist, but well-drained soil with lots of 
organic matter and a pH between 6.0 and 7.0. 
Plants need extra water during summer while 
bulbs are forming. Water deeply when soil is 
dry. Once stalks begin to droop and brown at 
the end of summer, withhold water.
Garlic is closely related to onions and 
prone to the same problems, especially onion 
maggots. See the Onion entry beginning on 
page 155 for more information.
Geranium
Cranesbill. Perennials.
The cranesbills. Geranium spp., are hardy, 
easy-to-grow perennials that are often con­
fused with the more tender zonal or bedding
geraniums, which actually belong to the genus 
Pelargonium. Although related to the better- 
known zonal geraniums, cranesbills (also called 
hardy or true geraniums) are distinctly differ­
ent from their tender relatives. Most have a 
mounding growth habit with spread roughly 
equal to height. Plants range from 4" to 4' tall 
with lobed to deeply divided foliage. Rowers 
bloom in spring and early summer in shades of 
pink, purple, red, and blue; many blossoms fea­
ture darker contrasting veins in petals or dark 
eyes. Some geraniums have a spreading growth 
habit; these are ideal for use as groundcovers.
Grow cranesbills in full sun to partial 
shade. Some species will grow in heavy shade, 
but, in general, too much shade reduces flow­
ering and causes leggy growth. Plants tolerate 
some drought, but perform best in moist, well- 
drained soil of average fertility. Rich, moist 
soils encourage invasive growth in some species. 
Divide every 3-4 years in spring or fall. Some 
cranesbills form taproots that resist division: 
increase these types through root cuttings, stem 
cuttings, or seeds.
Hardy and fairly pest-free, cranesbills suf­
fer few problems beyond those common to 
most perennials. Geranium aphids and four- 
lined plant bugs may attack them; see “Leaves, 
stems, and buds distorted, sticky; clusters of 
small insects" on page 177 and ‘‘Buds and 
leaves deformed or dwarfed*’ on page 178 for 
information on controls.

GLADIOLUS ■ 
105
Gladiolus
Gladiolus, glad. Conns.
Showy, 2'-4' tall glads brighten summer 
with tall spikes of trumpet-shaped, often bi­
colored flowers. The 6-petaled blooms range 
from 2" to 5" wide and open from the bottom 
of the spike upward. Glads are upright plants 
with narrow, sword-shaped, 1 
long leaves. 
Hundreds of cultivars of common gladiolus 
(Gladiolus X  hortulanus) offer gardeners a 
spectrum of flower colors and forms from 
which to choose.
Select and plant gladiolus corms in spring. 
Do not buy or use corms that are lightweight, 
spongy, or showing signs of decay. See the 
illustration on page 49 for more information. 
Good corms are about IV2" wide with high 
tops. Large, healthy corms flower more quickly 
than smaller ones. Plant corms after danger 
of frost has passed. To create a succession of 
bloom, plant at 2-week intervals or plant 
different-size corms all at one time. Allow 
at least 3 months between planting and the 
first frost.
Prepare soil to l'deep in a sunny location. 
Add plenty of organic matter to ensure good 
drainage. Plant corms from 3" to 8" deep— 
about 4 times their thickness: space about 6" 
apart. Make sure pointed growing tips face 
upward. Water regularly: glads need about 1" 
of water per week. Mulch to help retain soil 
moisture. Side-dress with compost or slow- 
release. general-purpose fertilizer when plants 
emerge and when flowers show color. Plan to 
stake up the tall, flower-laden spikes; nearly 
all cultivars require some form of support.
In the South, gladiolus corms overwinter 
safely in the ground, but in most of the coun­
try they must be dug and stored indoors before 
hard frost. Allow leaves to die back naturally
for about 6 weeks after flowering stops. After 
leaves and stalks turn brown, dig corms and 
shake off loose soil; cut away stems just above 
the top of the corms. Let corms dry out of the 
sun for a few days. Do not remove husks, as they 
help retain moisture. Discard withered old 
corms. Separate cormels, the tiny offspring sur­
rounding a mature bulb, and store for planting— 
these bloom in 1-2 years. Check all corms for 
decay, spotting, or other disease symptoms. 
Dust with sulfur or copper-based fungicide to 
guard against disease problems; store in a 
cool (40°F), dry, well-ventilated place.
Problems
Flowers deformed; leaves and petals with 
white flecks. Cause: Thrips. Gladiolus thrips 
are a very destructive common pest. These 
•As", yellow to black, flying insects feed by 
rasping petals and leaf surfaces, leaving silvery 
spots and streaks. They hide under leaf sheaths 
and inside flowers. Other symptoms are par­
tial bloom, failure to bloom, and shriveling. 
Thrips wastes may appear as black spots on 
the undersides of leaves. Infested corms are 
dark, sticky, and rough.
Cut away and destroy severely infested 
plant parts. Use blue sticky traps to monitor 
and trap pests. Encourage native predators 
such as pirate bugs, lacewings. and lady beetles. 
Insecticidal soap sprays give some control of 
thrips populations, but may affect beneficials 
as well. To limit thrips infestation, dig corms 
early in fall and cut off tops before thrips 
move down into corms. Bag and discard debris. 
Dust corms with pyrethrin to control thrips in 
storage. Or soak them in a Lysol solution (1V2 
tablespoons in 1 gallon water) for several hours 
before planting.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. Plants 
infested with aphids have growth that may be 
curled, puckered, or stunted. Leaves may turn

106 
■ 
PR<)BLEM-SOI.VING PLAN*!' (il JDK
yellow or brown; feeding can seriously dam­
age flower buds or blooms. As aphids feed, 
they excrete sticky honeydew; black, sooty 
mold fungus often forms on honeydew. fur­
ther disfiguring plants.
Use a strong spray of water in the morn­
ing to knock aphids off glads, paying particu­
lar attention to the undersides of leaves. 
Encourage predators such as lacewings and 
lady beetles. If control is not satisfactory, spray 
with insecticidal soap. Treat severe problems 
with neem or a commercial pyrethrin spray or 
dust. Destroy seriously infested plants.
Leaves yellow, distorted; flowers absent; 
corms decayed. Cause; Bulb miles. These 
•/»", whitish pests favor damaged, rotting corms, 
but travel from those to healthy ones. Feeding 
causes corky, brown spots on corms, which 
eventually turn dry and crumbly. Dig and 
destroy seriously infested corms and the sur­
rounding soil. Don't replant corms in infested 
soil. Kill mites by dipping corms in hot (120°F) 
water for a few minutes. Examine corms care­
fully when purchasing. For hints on choosing 
healthy bulbs, see the illustration on page 49.
Leaves yellow; plant dies early. Cause: 
Dry rot. Other symptoms of this fungal dis­
ease include dry. brown or black, corky spots 
on corms and husk coverings. You may see 
black fungal growth spots on decayed leaf 
bases. Plants may turn yellow and die prema­
turely. Choose corms carefully to avoid infected 
specimens. Destroy infected plants. Do not 
replant in same area. Replant only in well- 
drained soil.
Leaves mottled yellow and distorted; flow­
ers small and faded. Cause: Fusarium yellows. 
This soilborne fungal disease is first seen as 
bending and curling of leaves and stems: foliage 
yellows and dies, starting with the oldest leaves. 
On corms small reddish brown lesions enlarge 
and darken: entire corms may become hard, 
dry, and mummified. Immediately destroy 
infected corms. Do not replant corms in same
area. Some cultivars are more resistant than 
others; check with a reputable nursery or call 
your local extension agent for area-specific 
recommendations.
Leaves stippled and pale; growth poor. 
Cause: Spider mites. Mites feeding on leaves 
remove plant nutrients; fine webbing may 
appear on foliage. Use strong sprays of water 
when first symptoms appear. Mites multiply 
quickly and prefer drought-stressed, dusty 
plants. Keep gladiolus well-watered and healthy. 
Treat severe infestations of spider mites with 
avermectins, citrus oils, insecticidal soap, neem. 
or pyrethrin. Remove and destroy badly infested 
plants.
Stems eaten through at base. Cause: 
Wireworms. These click beetle larvae are com­
mon in soils formerly covered by sod or with 
high organic content. These slender, hard- 
bodied, yellowish worms drill holes in corms 
as they feed, damaging them and hastening 
decay. Set out traps made from buried pieces 
of raw potato or carrot; check every 1-2 days 
and destroy wireworms; replace traps as 
necessary. Delay planting corms until the soil 
is very warm: apply parasitic nematodes to 
soil to reduce wireworm populations.
Flowers, leaves, and stalks spotted; corms 
rotted. Cause: Botrytis blight. This fungal 
disease also causes slimy, collapsed leaves and 
flowers. It is most prevalent in cool, damp 
weather. Prevention includes planting gladio­
lus in areas with good air circulation. Avoid 
low or shaded areas. Water so leaves dry be­
fore sunset. Remove all debris at the end of 
the season and destroy.
Leaves with reddish brown spots; corms 
with pale to brown spots. Cause: Scab. This 
bacterial disease also causes brown spots on 
blossoms; plants rot at the base and fall over. 
Spots on corms turn dark brown with sunken 
centers and scabby margins. Dig and destroy 
infested plants; do not replant corms in in­
fested soil.

GOOSEBERRY 
■ 
107
Gleditsia
Honey locust. Trees.
Honey locusts are deciduous trees with 
alternate, fine-textured leaves. They cast dap­
pled shade and, except for their thorniness and 
messy pods, are excellent as specimen or street 
trees. Thornless, nonfruiting cultivars are 
preferable. Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis 
is thornless honey locust, from which most 
cultivars have been selected for landscape use.
Set out in spring or fall as bare-root or 
balled-and-burlapped plants. Honey locusts 
are undemanding and are well-suited to city 
conditions. While they prefer moist, fertile, 
slightly alkaline soil, they tolerate drought 
and salt.
Problems
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
Webworms can be a serious problem on honey 
locust. Some cultivars, such as ‘Moraine’, show 
some resistance to webworm damage. R>r other 
control information, see “Leaves skeletonized 
or with large holes: branches may be webbed" 
on page 236. Gypsy moths also feed on leaves, 
but they don't form webs. See “Plant defoli­
ated" on page 236 for controls.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. See “Plant defoli­
ated: branches bear cocoon I ike bags" on page 
236 for control suggestions.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. See “Trunk 
or branches with small holes; limbs die or 
break off" on page 238 for controls.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. For 
details, see “Trunk or branches with oozing 
lesions: branch tips die back" on page 238.
Gooseberry
Ribes birteUum. R. uva-crispa 
(Saxifiragaceae)
G ooseberries are thorny bushes with 
arched branches growing 3-5'. The incon­
spicuous flowers are borne laterally on 1-year- 
old wood and on short spurs—short branches 
that elongate only a fraction of an inch per 
year—on older wood. Gooseberries are hardy 
in Zones 3-8.
In cool climates plant gooseberries in 
full sun. Choose partial shade in hot climates. 
Maintain a thick, organic mulch beneath plants 
to keep soil cool and moist. Prune mature 
plants every winter, cutting away all but 6 of 
the shoots that grew the previous season at 
ground level. Also remove all wood more than
3 years old. Gooseberries are self-pollinating.
Fruit Problems
Fruit with powdery white or gray coating.
Cause: American gooseberry mildew. This fun­
gal disease spreads most rapidly during peri­
ods of warm days followed by cool nights. 
Under these conditions the crop can be ruined 
overnight. For more information, see “Leaves 
with powdery white patches; leaves stunted 
and deformed" below.
Fruit with holes when nearly ripe; fruit 
and leaves covered with webs. Cause: Goose­
berry fruitworms. These are the yellow-green 
larvae of a moth that infests both gooseberries 
and currants. Damaged fruit may be hollowed 
out and may change color prematurely. Clean 
up and destroy damaged fruit to reduce future 
populations.
Fruit colors and drops early. Cause: Cur­
rant fruit fly larvae. The currant fruit fly lays 
eggs on gooseberries and currants in the spring. 
The larvae that hatch from these eggs feed on
Cop>

108 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
berries and cause them to drop. Infested ber­
ries have a dark spot surrounded by a red 
halo. Early-bearing cultivars, such as ‘Oregon 
Champion and ‘Welcome, may escape damage. 
Control this pest by destroying all infested 
berries as soon as you find them.
Leaf Problems
Leaves with powdery white patches; leaves 
stunted and deformed. Cause: American goose­
berry mildew. To prevent this fungal disease, 
avoid overfertilizing plants. Lush, sappy growth 
is more susceptible to infection. Plants well- 
supplied with potassium are best able to resist 
mildew. For serious infection, spray plants with 
lime-sulfur. Or spray a solution made from 1 
pound of washing soda (sodium carbonate) 
plus V* pound of soap in 1 gallon of water. 
Don’t spray sulfur on the cultivars Bedford 
Yellow’, ‘Langley Gage", and ‘Leveller’; these 
are easily damaged by sulfur. Cultivars resistant 
to gooseberry mildew include ‘Hinnomaki 
Yellow’, ‘Lepaa Red', ‘Poorman’, and ‘Welcome’.
Leaves with spots; leaves yellow and drop. 
Causes: Septoria leaf spot; anthracnose. Since 
both these fungal diseases overwinter on leaf 
litter, rake up leaves or bury them under a 
thick mulch. Copper sprays also control both 
diseases. If defoliation occurs late in the season, 
it does little harm.
Foliage stripped from bushes just as leaves 
expand. Cause: Im ported currantworm s. 
These are the larvae of a sawfly that lays eggs 
on gooseberry bushes. The larvae devour the 
leaves, then drop to the ground to pupate. 
Control with a commercial pyrethrin spray. 
Make sure to spray into the center of the bush. 
Controlling of the first brood may eliminate 
the need for another spray.
Leaves blistered and reddened. Cause: 
Aphids. These tiny insects cluster on leaf 
undersides. If damage is severe, spray with 
insecticidal soap, neem, or pyrethrin, making 
sure to get the undersides of the leaves.
Grape
Vitis spp. and hybrids (Vitaceae)
Grapes, one of the most ancient culti­
vated crops, are perennial, woody vines that 
cling to support by means of tendrils. Under 
ideal conditions vines may live for over 100 
years. Fruit is produced on shoots that grow 
off 1-year-old wood.
There are 4 main types of grapes grown in 
North America: European, or wine grapes (Vitis 
vinifera); American (V labrusca), such as ‘Con­
cord’; hybrids between European and Ameri­
can; and muscadine ( V. rotundi/olia). European 
grapes generally are most susceptible to dis­
eases. American grapes are the most cold- 
hardy. Their hardiness (Zones 4-10) depends 
on the species and cultivar.
Culture
Plant in a sunny site with deep, well- 
drained, moderately fertile soil and good air 
circulation to promote disease resistance. Train 
vines to a fence or trellis. Prune in late winter 
to keep the fruit within reach, to increase 
cluster size, and to allow air and sunlight to 
penetrate the branches. Enclose fruit clusters 
in paper bags to keep birds away from berries 
and to control some insects and diseases. Many 
muscadines need cross-pollination, but the 
other types are self-pollinating.
Fruit Problems
Young fruit covered with a white coating; 
fruit ripens unevenly or covered with blotches.
Causes: Powdery mildew; downy mildew. Early 
in the season, fruit infected with powdery 
mildew has a white, dustlike coating on the 
berries. Infected plants may set few berries. 
Later on, the infection can halt the growth of

GRAPE 
■ 
109
GRAPE ♦ *538^
Leaves with a 
white powdery
coating on the 
upper surfaces, 
ause Powdery mildew. 
Fruit blotched or 
ripens unevenly; 
skins may split.
Leaves with- 
irk-ringcd. 
sunken sp o ts 
with light centers. 
Canes or sh oots '' 
Cause: Anthr.
w ith reddish or green 
Spots also appear
sw ellings above nodes. 
Qn canes and ca
Cause: Grape cane gaflmakers.
Larvae tunnel in canes 
and cause them to 
break off at yalls.jm *
;  
a
I
P  
J**}! ' $>■ v  - 
' fSsfri r rJ~ 'i ■. w
Vines stunted, unproductive, 
eventually dying.
Cause: Grape phylloxeras. 
Feeding of this aphidlike pest 
causes root tips to die. 
docompo * also forms 
harmless eal galls.
V
Wingless adult

110 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
the berry skins, causing them to split while 
green. Ripened clusters have blotchy, poor- 
tasting fruit, but have no white growth.
Ripening fruit clusters infected with downy 
mildew may have a mix of hard, reddish green, 
infected berries and soft, juicy, healthy berries. 
The fuzzy coating on fruit apparent early in 
the season may not be present. For informa­
tion on controls for these diseases, see "Leaves 
with a white powdery coating on the upper 
surfaces" below for powdery mildew symp­
toms; for downy mildew, see "Leaves with 
white, cottony growth on undersides" below.
Fruit with light brown spots that enlarge 
and darken. Cause: Black rot. Common east 
of the Rockies, especially in hot, humid weather, 
black rot causes fruit to shrivel into hard, 
black shriveled berries (known as mummies) 
that remain on the cluster. Overwintering mum­
mies and infected canes or shoots carry the 
d isease from  o n e grow ing season to the next. 
For control, remove and destroy all mummies. 
For persistent infection, apply copper sprays. 
Cultivars moderately resistant to black rot 
include ‘Beta’, ‘Campbell’s Early’, ‘Cascade’, 
‘Chancellor’, ‘De Chaunac’, ‘Delaware’, ‘Elvira’, 
‘Fredonia’, ‘Hunt’, ‘Ives’, ‘James’, ‘Scuppemong’, 
‘Sheridan’, and ‘Worden’. See page 109 for an 
illustration of this disease.
Fruit with small, dark-ringed, sunken spots 
with light centers. Cause: Anthracnose. For 
more information on this disease, also called 
bird’s-eye rot, see ‘‘Leaves with dark-ringed, 
sunken spots with light centers" below.
Fruit clusters enveloped with a fluffy, gray- 
brown coating. Cause: Botrytis bunch rot. 
This fungal disease appears in tight fruit clus­
ters and in vines with poor air circulation. For 
prevention, thin berries within clusters and 
remove some leaves around fruit. Clean up 
prunings, cluster stems, and mummified fruit 
by early spring. Plant resistant cultivars, includ­
ing ‘Baco No. 1‘, ‘Cascade’, ‘Catawba*, ‘Concord*,
Delaware’, ‘De Chaunac’, ‘Fredonia’, ‘Ives’, 
and ‘Niagara’.
When the timing of this infection is perfect, 
it imparts a special taste to European wine 
grapes. In this case it is called “noble rot," for 
the taste it imparts to wine.
Fruit webbed together with holes chewed 
from one berry to another. Cause: Grape berry 
moths. This pest, common east of the Rockies, 
is a green or brown, 7/h>"caterpillar that moves 
from fruit to fruit, feeding on pulp and seeds. 
Pick and destroy infested berries, which shrivel 
and color prematurely. Larvae also feed on 
flowers and newly set fruit. Larvae cut flaps in 
the edges of leaves and roll them over with 
webbing to pupate. At the end of the season, 
collect and destroy or bury fallen leaves, which 
may harbor overwintering pupae. For heavy 
infestations, spray BTK to kill the caterpillars. 
See page 109 for an illustration of this pest.
Fruit covered with a sticky coating and 
black mold. Causes: Grape whiteflies; grape 
mealybugs. Whiteflies and mealybugs secrete 
a sticky coating, called honeydew; sooty mold, 
a black superficial fungus, feeds on the 
honeydew. Both whiteflies and mealybugs are 
serious grape pests in California.
To control whiteflies, remove nearby buck­
thorns (Rhamnus spp.), where the pest over­
winters. Or spray nearby buckthorns in the 
winter with dormant oil spray.
Natural enemies usually keep mealybugs 
in check, but for heavy infestations, introduce 
mealybug destroyers (Cryptolaemus spp.), also 
called Australian lady beetles. Buy these nat­
ural predators from commercial insectaries 
or natural farm and garden suppliers. Also, 
ants protect mealybugs from predators and 
feed on their honeydew. To make mealybugs 
more susceptible to predators, control ants by 
placing bait stations containing boric acid on 
the ground around vines.
Fruit with holes. Cause: Birds. Birds peck

GRAPE 
■ 
111
holes in ripening berries and are especially 
fond of red or blue cultivars. Damaged fruit 
attracts bees and wasps for further feeding. 
Drape a net over the whole vine or bag indi­
vidual clusters in paper bags.
Leaf and Branch Problems
Leaves with a white powdery coating on 
the upper surfaces. Cause: Powdery mildew. 
Infected leaves eventually become distorted, 
turn brown, and fall. Dark patches appear on 
canes. This fungal disease weakens vines, dimin­
ishes yield, and makes plants more suscepti­
ble to winter injury. More common in the 
West, it spreads fastest when days are dry and 
warm and nights are cool. For susceptible 
plantings, apply sulfur spray in the spring. 
Plant resistant cultivars, including ‘Canadice', 
‘Cayuga White’, ‘Ives’, and ‘Steuben’. See page 
109 for an illustration of this disease.
Leaves with white, cottony growth on 
undersides. Cause: Downy mildew. Other 
symptoms of this fungal disease include small 
yellow leaf spots, distorted or brown leaves, 
and early leaf drop. Older leaves are affected 
first, but the disease also attacks shoots and 
tendrils. To control downy mildew, remove 
and destroy all diseased leaves and tendrils in 
the fall. Since the fungus overwinters on bud 
scales and shoots, you may have to spray vines 
with copper several times throughout the grow­
ing season to control the disease. Do not spray 
copper during flowering. Plant resistant 
cultivars, including ‘A urora’, ‘Baco N o .l\ 
‘C anadice’, ‘C ascade’, ‘C oncord’, ‘Foch*, 
‘Himrod’, and ‘Steuben’. See page 109 for an 
illustration of this disease.
Leaves with dark-ringed, sunken spots with 
light centers. Cause: Anthracnose. Also called 
bird’s-eye rot, this fungal disease weakens but 
usually doesn’t kill vines. For control, remove 
and destroy diseased portions, including
infected berries, and spray in the spring with 
lime-sulfur. Muscadine grapes and the Ameri­
can cultivars ‘Concord’, ‘Delaware’, ‘Moore 
Early’, and ‘Niagara’ are anthracnose-resistant. 
See page 109 for an illustration of this disease.
Leaves with reddish brown spots with black 
specks. Cause: Black rot. Leaves may wilt and 
shoots may show large, black, elliptical lesions. 
For more information, see "Fruit with light 
brown spots that enlarge and darken" above.
Leaves or leaf petioles with reddish 
swellings. Cause: Grapevine tomato gall. The 
xh" swellings are galls made by a very small fly 
called a midge. If you slit one of the galls 
open, you may find small pinkish orange mag­
gots inside. These galls are harmless. Just prune 
them off.
Leaves with green, pealike swellings on 
undersides. Cause: Grape phylloxeras. Phyl­
loxeras are aphids that make leaf galls to hold 
eggs and young. Inside I gall, you may find 
hundreds of yellowish nymphs. Grape phyl­
loxeras are native to the United States and are 
tolerated by American grapes, but they're seri­
ous pests of European grapes. In fact, when 
phylloxeras were accidentally transported to 
France in the late 1800s, they spread rapidly 
through vineyards and killed almost a third of 
the grapevines there. To avoid problems with 
phylloxeras, plant American or French hybrid 
grapes, both of which are resistant to this pest. 
Phylloxeras also attack roots of susceptible 
species, causing death of the whole vine. See 
page 109 for an illustration of this pest.
Leaves with pale stipples along leaf veins. 
Cause: Leafhoppers. These green or brown, 
Vio"-»/2" insects suck juices from leaf undersides, 
causing foliage to be stippled with tiny white 
spots. Heavily infested leaves may turn yellow 
or brown and drop from the vine. Though 
they are quite common, leafhoppers rarely 
cause serious damage to backyard grapes. Many 
natural enemies keep them in check. Where

112 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
further control is needed, spray leaves with 
insecticidal soap.
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Japanese 
beetles. These xh '\ metallic blue-green insects 
with bronze wing covers feed on leaves in 
early summer. For light infestations, visit plants 
in the morning while beetles are sluggish and 
knock them off leaves into jars filled with 
soapy water. For more information, see “Leaves 
skeletonized'* on page 46. See page 109 for 
an illustration of this pest.
Canes or shoots break easily. Cause: 
Grape cane girdlers. This Vs" beetle punc­
tures a cane, lays a single egg inside, and then 
encircles the cane with 2 rows of punctures. 
Damaged canes or shoots then break off easily. 
Damage is usually minor, but to control this 
pest, remove and destroy the injured cane a 
few inches below the area with puncture marks.
Canes or shoots with reddish or green 
swellings above nodes. Cause: Grape cane 
gallmakers. This '/«" beetle deposits a single 
egg in a cane and then makes additional punc­
tures in a vertical row above the original egg- 
laying site. The area where the egg is deposited 
enlarges to a red or green gall about twice the 
diameter of the cane. Larvae tunnel in canes, 
and canes often break off at the galls. Damage 
is usually minor, but to control this pest, remove 
and destroy the injured cane a few inches 
below the gall. See page 109 for an illustration 
of this pest.
Whole Plant Problems
Vines stunted, unproductive, eventually 
dying. Causes: Grape phylloxeras: grape scale: 
Pierce's disease. Grape phylloxeras are aphids 
that infest both leaves and roots. Leaf infesta­
tion causes harmless, pealike leaf galls. Root 
infestation causes knotlike root galls that pre­
vent nutrient uptake and cause stunting and 
death of the vine.
Phylloxeras are difficult to eradicate.
Where they are a problem, plant American 
grapes or European grapes grafted onto Amer­
ican grape rootstock, both of which are resistant 
to this pest. For more information on grape 
phylloxeras, see “Leaves with green, pealike 
swellings on undersides'' on page 111. Also 
see page 109 for an illustration of this pest.
Grape scales are tiny, round, immobile 
insects resembling light gray bumps. Scales 
usually hide under the loose bark of older 
canes or trunks, where they suck sap and 
cause the vine to slowly decline. For control, 
spray with dormant oil in late winter and prune 
old growth severely.
Pierce’s disease, a bacterial disease com­
mon in the South, is spread by leafhoppers. 
Infected vines typically show scorched, dried 
leaves in midsummer, wilted dried fruit, and 
eventual death of the vine. There is no cure 
for this disease. Dig up infected plants and 
replant with disease-free stock. Muscadine 
grapes are resistant to Pierce's disease, as are 
the American grape cultivars ‘Champanel’, 
‘Herbemont’, and ‘Lenoir’.
Gypsophila
Baby's-breath, gypsophila. Perennials.
The delicate white or pink flower sprays 
of baby's-breath (Gypsophila paniculata) are 
a mainstay of floral arrangements. Sprays may 
have more than 1,000 single or double flowers, 
each just x/\tn wide. This mounding plant is 
equally delightful in the garden where it grows
2-3' tall and 2’ wide, bearing copious blooms 
over slender, gray-green leaves. Creeping baby’s- 
breath (G. repens) forms a blossom-covered
Cop

HAMAMEIJS ■ 
113
mat only 4"-8" tall and is useful for edging or 
rock gardens.
Plant baby's-breaths in sites where they 
wont be disturbed or moved: their large fleshy 
roots do not transplant well. Given full sun, 
alkaline soil, and good drainage, plants thrive 
with little care. Remove spent flowers to pro­
long bloom. Protect plants with winter mulch; 
don’t cover crowns until after the ground is 
frozen to avoid rotting.
Problems
Leaves stippled; growth poor. Cause: 
Leafhoppers. Slender, wedge-shaped, green­
ish yellow pests only '/»" long, aster leafhop­
pers suck sap from the undersides of leaves as 
they feed, discoloring and distorting the foliage. 
Damaged leaves shrivel and drop. Encourage 
predators such as bigeyed bugs and parasitic 
wasps, or spray with insecticidal soap. In severe 
cases treat plants with a commercial neem or 
pyrethrin spray.
Leaves and flowers greenish yellow, dis­
torted; new growth spindly. Cause: Aster 
yellows. Feeding leafhoppers may transmit this 
disease. There is no control for aster yellows. 
Remove and destroy infected plants; do not 
compost them. Prevent the disease spread by 
controlling sucking pests such as leafhoppers 
and aphids.
Hamamelis
Witch hazel. Shrubs and small trees.
Witch hazels are alternate-leaved shrubs 
with narrow-petaled, twisted, yellow or cop­
pery flowers appearing either in late fall or 
late winter. They flourish in well-drained but 
moisture-retentive soils, enriched with lots of 
organic matter.
Witch hazels are relatively free of serious 
insect pests. Caterpillars and Japanese bee­
tles may cause some damage; see “Leaves 
skeletonized or with large holes; branches may 
be webbed" and “Leaves skeletonized" on page 
236 for controls. Witch hazel cone gall, which 
appears as a conical gall on the upper leaf 
surfaces, is caused by a kind of aphid, as are 
elliptical galls on the flower buds. Neither is 
usually a major problem: control both by 
repeated applications of insecticidal soap in 
late spring, early summer, and autumn.
Copyrighted material

114 
■ 
PR( )BU:\1 SOLVING PLANT GlJIDE
Helianthus
Hedera
Ivy. Vines.
Ivies are vigorous evergreen vines, climb­
ing by means of rootlike appendages. They 
are widely planted as groundcovers, as vines 
on walls, or as houseplants.
Set out bare-root plants in spring or fall. 
Almost any moisture-retentive soil will suit 
ivy. In the North, strong winter sun can scorch 
leaves; its best to choose a site where some 
shade is available. Cut back in late winter to 
promote denser growth.
Problems
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. For controls, see “Leaves wrinkled 
and discolored" on page 235.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See "Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps" on page 237 for control information.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See "Leaves stippled with 
yellow; foliage webbed" on page 236 for 
controls.
Leaves with circular brown spots. Cause: 
Bacterial leaf spot. This bacteria can cause 
water-soaked spots on lower leaves. These 
spots turn brownish black and may spread to 
form large patches of dead tissue. To prevent 
the spread of this disease, avoid working around 
wet plants. Remove and destroy affected parts; 
spray bordeaux mix on remaining plants.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
“Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; branch 
tips die back" on page 238 for controls.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. For controls, see 
“Leaves with powdery white coating" on 
page 237.
Sunflower Annuals.
Rapid growth, showy flowers, and tasty 
seeds make sunflowers fun to grow as well as 
nutritious. The plants can grow to 10' tall. 
Individual flowers may reach 14" across, with 
golden petals and a brown center that becomes 
a mass of seeds by late summer.
Sunflowers need warmth to germinate. 
Direct-sow seeds Vz" deep in average soil in 
early May. They will germinate within 10 days. 
Space tall-growing cultivars 2' apart, or they 
will crowd each other. Sunflowers perform 
well in average soil and full sun, although they 
will tolerate light shade. Apply a general- 
purpose fertilizer once, about midway through 
the growing season.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. For control measures, see “Leaves, 
stems, and buds distorted” on page 20.
Leaves with ragged holes. Cause: Cater­
pillars. Caterpillars of all kinds find large sun­
flower leaves a tasty food supply. A healthy 
plant can generally withstand an attack. 
Handpick pests, or spray leaves with BTK.
Leaves wilt. Causes: Lack of water; fun­
gal wilt. If a good soaking does not perk up 
your plant by the next day, suspect a fungal 
wilt. These fungi live in the soil and move 
upward through the plant. Leaves may be mot­
tled with green and yellow, and dark brown 
areas may appear on and within sunflower 
stems. There is no control; remove and destroy 
infected plants. Avoid replanting sunflowers 
in that area.
Leaves with powdery white patches. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. For controls, see 
“Leaves with powdery white patches" on 
page 19.

HHMEROCALUS ■ 
115
Helichrysum
Strawflower. Annuals.
These l'/i-3' Australian natives are best 
known as an integral part of dried flower 
arrangements. If picked when partially opened, 
strawflowers hold their color well and last for 
several years indoors. Colors include white, 
yellow, salmon, red, and pink.
Sow seeds indoors 6-8 weeks before the 
last outdoor frost. Do not cover seeds; they 
need light during the 7-10 day germination 
period. Transplant seedlings 9"-12" apart. 
Where summers are long, direct-sow straw­
flowers in late spring or early summer. Plant 
in full sun in well-drained, moderately fertile, 
slightly moist soil. They are fairly drought- 
tolerant once established. Taller cultivars may 
need staking. Little fertilizer is needed; too 
much fertilizer results in many leaves and few 
flowers. Pests and diseases are rarely a problem.
Helleborus
Hellebore. Perennials.
Hellebores flower in winter and early 
spring, earning names such as Christmas rose 
{Helleborus niger) or Lenten rose (//. Orientalis). 
Most have green, creamy white, or dull purple 
blooms, carried over low evergreen foliage.
Plant in partial shade, such as that found 
under deciduous trees, in moist, well-drained, 
neutral soil rich in organic matter. Maintain 
even soil moisture with a summer mulch. The 
brittle rhizomes make this plant difficult to 
divide or transplant; if you must move them, 
do so with care. Dark brown to black leaf
spots, yellowing leaves, and stem cankers indi­
cate fungal infection; to prevent, spray with 
bordeaux mix or sulfur.
Hemerocallis
Daylily. Perennials.
Favored for their ability to thrive under 
tough conditions, daylilies grace many urban 
plantings. There are thousands of hybrids from 
which to choose. Plants range in height from 
1 lfi' to 3' and offer blossoms in every color but 
true white and blue. A mature planting pro­
vides hundreds of 2"-6", trumpet-shaped flow­
ers and graceful, swordlike, bright green leaves. 
Each flower lasts a day, then closes at night, 
but numerous buds provide extended periods 
of bloom.
Daylilies are easy-to-grow, nearly problem- 
free plants that perform best in full sun. Most 
also tolerate partial shade; in fact, plants may 
grow better in some shade in southern zones. 
Plant in well-drained, average soil and water 
regularly to get the plants established. After 
that, limited watering is fine, but don't let 
them dry out while blooming. Excess fertility 
encourages lush foliage and fewer flowers. 
Plants grow vigorously if undisturbed: clumps 
expand over time but are usually not invasive. 
Remove spent flower stalks to prolong bloom. 
In fall, cut all stems to the ground and remove 
dead foliage. Divide large clumps every 3-5 
years. Roots are tough, heavy, and tuberous, 
so this is not an easy job. Leave a crown bud 
and several solid roots on each division.
Problems
Flower buds die; stems have corky lesions.
Cause: Flower thrips. These */»" insects occa­
sionally infest daylilies, feeding on buds, stem
Cop

116 
■ 
PROBIJEM'SOLVING PLANT GU1DF.
tips, and flowers. Infested plants have dis­
torted blooms, and in severe cases, flower stalks 
fail to develop. Stems may develop corky lesions 
that extend several inches. Thrips are difficult 
to control because they burrow into plant 
tissue. Use blue sticky traps to monitor popu­
lations and trap pests. Pick off and destroy 
infested plant parts, and encourage natural 
predators such as pirate bugs, lacewings, and 
lady beetles. Regular sprays of insecticidal 
soap may give some control once pests are 
spotted on traps.
Leaves stippled, reddish to yellow, with 
fine webbing. Cause: Spider mites. These ’/so" 
arachnids feed on the undersides of leaves, 
causing them to yellow, dry up, and die; exces­
sive feeding turns foliage almost white, and 
fine webs cover leaves and growing tips. Mites 
seek out water-stressed plants in hot, dry 
weather; adequate watering guards against 
them. Hose off plants when symptoms first 
appear; a strong stream knocks mites off plants 
and may give control. Introduce predatory 
mites. Spray severe infestations of spider mites 
with avermectins, citrus oils, insecticidal soap, 
neem. or pyrethrin.
Herbs
Herbs are grown for their savory', aromatic, 
or medicinal parts. They include annuals, 
biennials, and perennials. In general, herbs 
are little troubled by pests and diseases if 
given good growing conditions.
To grow healthy, trouble-free plants, choose 
a well-drained site with as much sun as possible. 
Most do not need rich soil, and some actually 
prefer dry, poor soil; check individual entries 
for specific preferences.
Whole Plant Problems
Seedlings fall over; stems girdled or rot­
ted at soil line. Cause: Damping-off. This 
disease is caused by soil-dwelling fungi. To 
prevent it, disinfect reused pots and flats before 
filling them with fresh seed-starting mix. To 
disinfect, dip them in a 10 percent bleach 
solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts water) and 
let them air-dry. Sow seed thinly to allow for 
air movement around seedlings. Cover seed 
with a thin layer of soilless mix or vermiculite. 
Water only enough to keep soil moist, not soggy.
Seedlings clipped off at soil line. Cause: 
Cutworms. Check for fat. I" long, brown or 
gray caterpillars in the soil near the base of 
plants. Once they chew a seedling in two, 
there is nothing you can do except protect the 
remaining seedlings from their nocturnal at­
tacks. Place cutworm collars around transplants, 
sprinkle moist bran mixed with BTK on the 
soil surface in the evening, or add parasitic 
nematodes to the soil to control.
Plant yellow and stunted, wilts during 
bright, hot days; roots have swollen galls. 
Cause: Root knot nematodes. These micro­
scopic, wormlike creatures invade and feed 
on plant roots. Pull and destroy infected plants. 
Control pest nematodes by adding chitin or 
parasitic nematodes to the soil. Solarizing prob­
lem areas also reduces future problems.
Plant wilts; cut-open roots are discolored. 
Cause: Verticillium or Fusarium wilt. There is 
no cure for these diseases. They are caused by 
a number of fungi, each of which attack only 
specific plants or plant families. Pull and destroy 
infected plants. Avoid planting susceptible mem­
bers of the same plant family for 3 or more 
years in soil where disease symptoms have 
developed.
Leaf Problems
Leaves turn yellow, older ones first; plant 
stunted. Cause: Nitrogen deficiency. This may 
be caused by a low level of nitrogen in the soil

HEUCHERA 
■ 
117
or by waterlogged soil. Waterlogged soil dam­
ages roots and prevents them from using nutri­
ents available in the soil. Check soil moisture, 
and reduce watering if soil is soggy. Spray 
foliage with compost tea or fish-meal tea, or 
side-dress plants with compost to alleviate 
symptoms. Prevent problems by choosing well- 
drained sites, adding organic matter to the 
soil to add nitrogen and improve drainage, 
and by planting in raised beds.
Leaves yellow and curled; new growth 
distorted. Cause: Aphids. These small, soft- 
bodied, green, black, gray, pink, or white 
fluffy-coated insects suck plant juices. They 
leave a sticky honeydew on leaves and fruit 
that in turn supports the growth of black, 
sooty molds. Spray with a strong jet of water 
or insecticidal soap if populations are low. If 
populations are high, treat with a commercial 
neem or pyrethrin spray.
Leaves yellow; plant wilts; stems, crowns, 
or roots water-soaked and rotted. Cause: Stem, 
crown, or root rot. These diseases are often 
due to poor drainage or overwatering. Destroy 
infected plants or plant parts. Thin plants to 
increase air movement and reduce moisture 
around plants. Spray with a copper fungicide 
if weather is warm and wet and disease is se­
vere. Plant in well-drained soil or in raised beds.
Texas root rot occurs in warm climates 
and is favored by high temperatures and a pH 
above 7.0. If pH is high, add sulfur to the soil 
to lower it. Use a 3-year rotation to starve the 
fungus out of the soil.
Leaves with dark, yellow-bordered spots. 
Cause: Leaf blight. This disease is caused by 
various fungi. Leaves may turn yellow or drop 
off as the disease progresses. Spray foliage 
with fish emulsion or with sulfur to prevent 
the spread of mild infections.
Lower leaves covered with tan, fuzzy 
growth. Cause: Gray mold. This fungal dis­
ease attacks a wide range of edible and orna­
mental plants. Pick off and destroy moldy
leaves. Thin plants to increase air movement 
and reduce moisture around leaves, since the 
mold thrives in damp conditions. Spray foliage 
with compost tea to control mold. Spray with 
sulfur if the weather is wet and cool and the 
disease is severe.
Leaves with powdery white growth on upper 
surface. Cause: Powdery mildew. This symp­
tom is caused by a number of fungi, each of 
which attacks only specific plants. Thin plants 
to increase air movement and reduce mois­
ture around leaves. Spray plants with compost 
tea, sulfur, or bordeaux mix to prevent the 
spread of mild infections.
Heuchera
Alumroot, coral bells. Perennials.
Although no other species in this genus 
compares with the dainty blossoms of coral 
bells (Heuchera sanguinea), several are worthy 
additions to the perennial border. Low-growing 
clumps of rounded, lobed, heart-shaped, or 
maplelike foliage are usually evergreen and 
interesting throughout most of the year. Culti­
vars of American alumroot (H. americana) and 
small-flowered alumroot (//. m ie rant ha), both 
grown more for foliage than flowers, offer leaves 
with purple coloring.
Plant alumroots in well-drained, richly 
organic soil in a sunny or lightly shaded spot. 
Partial shade is best for foliage and for plants 
in the South. Shallow, fleshy roots need regu­
lar watering and benefit from summer mulch­
ing: however, excess moisture, combined with 
poor drainage, promotes rots.
Problems
Leaves covered with white powder. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. Powdery mildew may mar
Cop

118 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOIVING PLANT GUIDE
foliage and is best limited through sanitation 
and air circulation. See “Leaves covered with 
white powder * on page 177 for controls.
Crowns blacken and die; leaves notched. 
Cause: Strawberry root weevils. The grubs of 
'A", black snout beetles feed on alumroots’ 
crowns starting in early spring. Adults feed at 
night on foliage. Remove and destroy infested 
plants; clean up debris where pests overwinter. 
Drench soil around roots with parasitic nema­
todes; spray pyrethrin on leaves at night to kill 
adults.
Hibiscus
Hibiscus, rose-of-Sharon.
Shrubs and trees.
These old-time favorites have bushy but 
upright habits and bloom in mid- to late summer. 
They are easy to grow, even withstanding sea­
shore conditions. Avoid unwanted volunteer 
seedlings by planting sterile cultivars.
Set out in spring or fall as bare-root or 
container-grown plants. They prefer full sun 
and average soil with added organic matter.
Hibiscus are fairly problem-free. Aphids 
or Japanese beetles may feed on foliage; see 
“Leaves wrinkled and discolored" on page
235 and “Leaves skeletonized" on page 236.
Hosta
Hosta, plantain lily. Perennials.
Grown primarily for their attractive, 5"-10", 
broadly lance-shaped leaves and durability as 
groundcovers, hostas are unparalleled peren­
nials for shady areas. Handsome ribbed leaves
may be short and narrow or broad and up to 
1 xt i  long; leaf colors range from light to dark 
green or blue-green and may be variegated 
with yellow, light green, cream, or white. Spikes 
of tubular, 2", white to purple flowers show 
nicely above foliage from mid- to late summer.
Hostas look their best in light to deep 
shade. Sunny sites encourage flowering but 
also cause foliage color to bleach and brown 
and sunburned spots to appear on leaves. Set 
plants 1-3' apart, depending on leaf size, in 
moist but well-drained, organic soil. Give plants 
7 2 "- 1 " of water weekly; mulch to avoid splat­
tering water onto leaves.
Hostas may be increased by division, 
although plantings will prosper undisturbed 
for many years. If desired, divide plants every 
5 years or so. Remove faded flower stalks to 
improve appearance, and cut back foliage at 
the end of the growing season.
All hostas go dormant in winter. New 
leaves emerge in spring. Try not to select heav­
ily puckered leaf forms for use under trees. 
The puckers or wrinkle designs catch leaf 
drippings, including gum and sap, which detract 
from the plants appearance.
Problems
Leaves small, light brown, papery, scorched, 
or bleached. Causes: Lack of water; too much 
sun. An easy way to ruin hostas is to let them 
dry out, even for a little while. Even if they 
continue to grow, plants will be stunted. Sun­
burned edges or spots reduce hostas orna­
mental value significantly and are best avoided 
through proper selection of planting site.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. Hostas broad, low-growing 
foliage welcomes these slimy pests. See “Leaves 
with large, ragged holes" on page 177 for 
controls.
Stems blacken at base; leaves yellow and 
wilt; plant collapses. Cause: Crown rot. Hostas 
are susceptible to fungal and bacterial attack 
when grown in poorly drained soil. Crown

HOI ’SF. PI ANTS 
■ 
119
injury and excess moisture during dormancy 
also increase the chances of infection. Choose 
well-drained sites; add organic m atter to 
improve soil drainage; keep winter mulch away 
from crowns. Remove and discard infected 
plants and the surrounding soil.
Houseplants
The world of houseplants covers a vast 
array of plant species from all over the world. 
And any enthusiast’s collection may include 
species native to a wide variety of climates, 
from tropical jungle-dwellers, such as some 
orchids or philodendrons, to desert-dwelling 
cacti. Despite the diverse cultural requirements 
different houseplants prefer, there are basic 
techniques that will ensure healthy plants that 
resist pests and diseases.
Culture
Since houseplants live in an artificial 
environment, maintaining pest- and disease- 
free plants requires attention to 4 main areas 
of care: light, temperature, humidity, and water. 
As with plants grown outdoors, healthy 
houseplants are less susceptible to attack by 
pests and diseases. Plants stressed by light 
exposure, temperature extremes, improper 
watering, or low humidity are more prone to 
problems than those provided with conditions 
that meet their basic requirements.
Unless you own an artificial lighting sys­
tem especially for houseplants. choose plants 
with light needs similar to the natural light in 
your home. Too little light on a sun-loving 
plant causes pale leaves and leggy growth. 
Too much sun on a plant that prefers low light 
causes leaf scorch, yellowing, and dehydration. 
North-facing windows provide indirect sun and 
the lowest light level; they’re also often the
coolest exposures. East- and west-facing win­
dows provide moderate amounts of bright light; 
west-facing windows, which receive hot after­
noon sun, tend to be warmer than east-facing 
ones. South-facing windows provide the bright­
est and longest-lasting light and also the most 
heat. Keep in mind that overhanging awnings, 
drapes, or nearby trees affect the amount of 
light plants receive.
As a general rule, plants grow best at 
daytime temperatures of 60°-80°F and night­
time temperatures of 58°-65°F Avoid wide 
temperature swings; keep plants away from 
heat vents, radiators, air-intake ducts, and air- 
conditioning vents.
Low humidity is a familiar problem to 
indoor gardeners. During the heating season, 
indoor humidity may only be 10 percent. Most 
tropical species require 40-60 percent humid­
ity to thrive. The easiest way to increase humid­
ity is to run a whole-house or portable 
humidifier. Not quite as efficient, but still 
worthwhile, is the practice of keeping a pan of 
water near a heat source. Grouping plants 
together also improves indoor humidity because 
leaf transpiration from a cluster of plants 
increases the air moisture in the immediate 
area. To further humidify a plant grouping, set 
plants on trays filled with 1" of pebbles and Vi" 
of water.
Most houseplants should be watered only 
when the soil is dry. Test soil dryness by dig­
ging your finger an inch into the soil. Water 
only if this soil is dry to the touch. Don’t allow 
excess w ater to  stan d  in sau cers, an d  avoid 
wetting foliage. Improper watering may cause 
wilting that can be mistaken for diseases.
Plants growing in a commercial potting 
mix need little additional fertilizer if repotted 
regularly. During active growth in spring and 
summer, most plants benefit from regular doses 
of a liquid organic fertilizer such as fish emul­
sion; mix and apply according to label direc­
tions. Fertilize less during the winter, when 
lower temperatures and light levels slow the

120 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
growth of most plants.
To catch problems before they become 
serious, it's a good idea to inspect plants regu­
larly for signs of insects or diseases. Rinsing 
the plant occasionally with room-temperature 
water in the sink or bathtub is also a good 
idea: It rinses away insects along with dust 
that can inhibit photosynthesis.
Problems
Leaves spotted, yellowed, browned, or 
wilted; roots, stems, or leaves with rotted spots.
Cause: Cultural problems. Too much or too 
little water, persistent hot or cold drafts, 
improper light exposure, potbound roots, or 
nutrient starvation can all cause symptoms 
that can be mistaken for pests or diseases.
To diagnose cultural problems, review the 
conditions the plant prefers and examine 
the plant. Also consider the amount of light the 
plant receives, review watering patterns, and 
look for drafts or other problems that may not 
be immediately apparent. Once you've decided 
on a cause, correct the situation. See “Cul­
ture" on page 119 for more information.
Leaves and stems with white fuzzy growth 
that later turns brown. Cause: Powdery mildew. 
Cut out all diseased parts; place the plant in 
an area where it will receive excellent air 
circulation. If necessary, use a small fan to 
move air around the plant.
Leaves and stems with white cottony 
patches. Cause: Mealybugs. Isolate affected 
plants; dip a cotton swab in 70 percent isopro­
pyl alcohol and wipe each insect. A few days 
later, rinse the plant in the shower, or out­
doors (in shade) with a fine mist of water from 
a hose. Check for mealybugs again after a 
month and re-treat if necessary.
Leaves pale and discolored; tiny brown 
bumps on undersides and stems. Cause: Scales. 
These immobile insects suck fluids from plant 
cells. They may excrete sticky honeydew onto 
nearby leaves. Isolate affected plants. Remove 
heavily infested leaves. Gently scrape insects
from stems with your fingernail; spray plants 
with insecticidal soap. (Don't use soap on ferns.) 
After a week, rinse plants in water. If the 
problem persists, wipe leaf undersides with a 
solution of 1 tablespoon vegetable oil in 3/» 
cup warm water.
Leaves pale or stippled with fine webbing 
on undersides. Cause: Spider mites. These 
spiderlike creatures, no larger than a speck of 
dust, suck juices from plant leaves. They spread 
most rapidly in hot, dry conditions. Isolate 
affected plants; ideally, move them to a more 
humid location. Remove heavily infested leaves 
and stems. Spray thoroughly with insecticidal 
soap (do not use soap on ferns), then mist with 
water daily for a week.
Leaves crinkled or curled with a sticky 
coating on undersides. Cause: Aphids. These 
tiny, sucking insects secrete a sugary honey­
dew that may attract ants. Isolate affected 
plants. Remove heavily infested leaves and 
stems. Wipe insects off stems with a cotton 
swab dipped in warm soapy water. Spray with 
insecticidal soap. (Do not use soap on ferns.)
Leaves with dark, sooty blotches. Cause: 
Sooty mold. This fungus lives on the honey­
dew excreted by aphids, mealybugs, and scales. 
Treat the plant for the insect infestation. Then 
clean the foliage with warm soapy water and 
rinse. See “Leaves and stems with white cot­
tony patches,” “Leaves pale and discolored: 
tiny brown bumps on undersides and stems," 
and “Leaves crinkled or curled with a sticky 
coating on undersides" above for information 
on controlling these insects.
Leaves, stems, or flowers with gray, moldy 
growth. Cause: Botrytis blight. This fungal 
disease thrives on plants that have been 
overwatered, overfed with nitrogen, or over­
crowded. Remove and discard affected plant 
parts. If the plant has tender growth due to 
excess fertilizer, withhold feeding until cur­
rent growth hardens off. Divide overgrown or 
crowded plants, improve air circulation, and 
withhold water until soil is nearly dry.

HYDRANGEA 
■ 
121
Hyacinthus
Hyacinth. Bulbs.
Cultivars of Hyacinthus Orientalis, the 
only species in this genus, are prized for the 
heady aroma they bring to the spring garden. 
Tubular or bell-shaped blossoms cover dense, 
blunt, 10"-12" tall, upright spikes; each bulb 
produces 1 spike of white, pink, blue, or yel­
low flowers. Narrow, straplike leaves surround 
the base of the stalk.
Plant bulbs in fall at least 1 month before 
the ground freezes. Select a site in full sun 
with humus-rich, well-drained soil; sheltering 
from wind reduces injury to rigid flower stalks. 
Set bulbs 4"-5" deep with pointed growing 
tips facing upward. Hyacinths multiply less 
freely than other bulbs and flowering tends to 
diminish with age. Plant new bulbs every 2-3 
years for optimal floral display. Remove spent 
flowers to prevent seed formation: let foliage 
die back naturally.
Problems
Leaves yellow or distorted; bulbs decayed. 
Cause: Bulb mites. Like most bulbs, hyacinths 
may be infested by bulb mites. See “Leaves 
yellow or distorted: bulbs decayed" on page 
50 for controls.
Leaves and stems with spots, gray mold, 
or yellow slime; bulbs decayed; growth poor. 
Cause: Bacterial and fungal rots. Hyacinths 
are subject to a number of rot diseases. Rots 
are prevalent in poorly drained soil; control 
through careful bulb selection and culture. 
For tips on buying healthy bulbs, see the illus­
tration on page 49.
Leaves with swollen spots; plant fails to 
grow. Cause: Bulb and stem nematodes. Tiny 
roundworms feed on bulbs; plants fail to grow 
in spring or fail to bloom. Swollen, yellow- 
green spots appear on leaves; an infested bulb.
cut in half, reveals dark blotches or rings. Wet 
soil encourages nematodes. Dig and destroy 
infested bulbs; check new bulbs carefully for 
pests. Plant in well-drained soil.
Hydrangea
Hydrangea. Shrubs and vines.
Hydrangeas are opposite-leaved, decidu­
ous shrubs and vines. The flowers are small 
but borne in large clusters. Hydrangeas are 
ideal for shrub borders or grouped for land­
scape interest.
Hydrangeas are among the few flowering 
shrubs that bloom well under shaded conditions, 
although they flourish in full sun in cooler 
climates. They prefer acid soils. Set out in 
spring or fall as balled-and-burlapped or 
container-grown plants.
Problems
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. For control information, see “Leaves 
wrinkled and discolored" on page 235.
Leaves tied together over flower buds.
Cause: Hydrangea leaftiers. The xh '\ green- 
bodied, brown-headed caterpillar causes the 
foliage to become ragged, turn brown, and 
die. If the infestation is light, break open the 
“envelopes" and pick off the caterpillars; for 
heavier infestations, spray plants with BTK.
Leaves deformed; shoot tips blackened. 
Cause: Tarnished plant bugs. This pest is an 
active, x/* \  light green to brown bug mottled 
with white, yellow, red, and black. When it 
feeds on the leaves, it produces a toxin that 
deforms the leaves and blackens the terminal 
shoots and flowers. Tarnished plant bug over­
winters on weeds and under leaves; removing 
these havens will greatly reduce the likelihood
Copyrighted material

122 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT Gl'IDF.
of subsequent infestation. Control severe infes­
tations by dusting leaves with pyrethrin.
Leaves with powdery white coating. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with powdery 
white coating” on page 237 for controls.
Flowers rot. Cause: Botrytis blight. In 
wet seasons, Botrytis fungi can cause a blight 
on hydrangeas that will spoil the flowers. Pick 
off and destroy affected blooms.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See “Leaves stippled with 
yellow; foliage webbed” on page 236 for sug­
gested controls.
Leaves and flowers skeletonized. Cause: 
Rose chafers. This 'A", reddish brown beetle 
with thick, yellowish hairs on its wing covers 
appears in late spring and damages both leaves
and flowers. Handpicking is the best control. 
Reduce populations of larvae by treating lawn 
areas with milky disease spores. Spray plants 
with pyrethrin as a last resort.
Leaves and flowers browned and wilted. 
Cause: Bacterial wilt. This disease can spread 
quickly, killing the plant in hot weather. Remove 
infected parts as soon as you see them; destroy 
seriously infected plants.
Leaves with small brown spots. Cause: 
Rust. Infected leaves have bright orange spots 
underneath and pale yellow spots on the upper 
surfaces; they eventually wilt and drop. Remove 
and destroy leaves infected with this fungal 
disease. As a last resort, spray or dust with 
sulfur, repeating as needed.
Iberis
Candytuft. Perennials.
These very hardy evergreen border plants 
brighten spring with clusters of tiny blossoms 
of pure or pink-tinged white. Evergreen can­
dytuft (Iberis sempervirens) grows to about 1'
tall with a spread of IV2’-2', while rock candy­
tuft [I. saxatilis) is even more compact, reach­
ing heights of 3"-6". The 1 lh"-2" inflorescences 
last several weeks.
Plant candytufts in full sun in well-drained 
soil. Light shade is tolerated but reduces 
flowering, as does drought. Cut plants back 
after flowering to encourage compact growth. 
Foliage may brown in cold, windy conditions; 
mulch lightly to reduce injury. Few pests or 
diseases trouble candytufts.
Copyrighted material

ILEX 
■ 
123
Ilex
Holly. TTrees and shrubs.
Hollies are deciduous or evergreen trees 
or shrubs with alternate leaves. The male 
and female flowers are borne on different 
plants; female plants produce striking red or 
black fruit. Hollies are useful as foundation 
shrubs, accent plants, informal hedges, and 
specimen plants.
Hollies prefer a moist, acid soil well- 
enriched with organic matter. Plant in sun or 
shade. Set out as balled-and-burlapped or 
container-grown plants in spring or fall; make 
sure that the top of the root ball is the same 
level at which the plant grew in the nursery. 
Their roots grow close to the surface, so don’t 
cultivate around them; a deep organic mulch 
will keep down weeds and provide a cool, 
moist root zone.
Protect evergreen hollies from winter sun 
and drying winds with a burlap screen or an 
antitranspirant spray. Remember to plant both 
male and female plants, so you’ll get the polli­
nation necessary for berries.
Problems
Leaves tunneled. Cause; Leafminers. This 
tiny insect is by far the most serious pest of 
hollies. For control information, see “Leaves 
tunneled’’ on page 237.
Leaves webbed together. Cause: Bud 
moths. These 
greenish white caterpillars 
web together and feed on the tips of new holly 
shoots in May. Fully grown larvae usually drop 
to the ground and overwinter in plant debris. 
Remove fallen leaves around plants. Destroy 
webs and handpick caterpillars. Spray leaves 
with BTK in April and May.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237 for control information.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed.
Cause: Spider mites. For controls, see “Leaves 
stippled with yellow; foliage webbed” on 
page 236.
Leaves with notched margins. Cause: Jap­
anese weevils. The 
brown adults attack 
foliage, and the legless white grubs feed on 
roots. Apply a sticky substance to the lower 
stems to prevent adults from climbing up the 
plants. Drench the soil around the base of the 
plant with a solution of parasitic nematodes 
to control weevil larvae. Spray leaves several 
times with pyrethrin for major infestations of 
adult weevils.
Leaves yellowed. Cause: Nitrogen defi­
ciency. This is usually most noticeable on 
older leaves. Regular fertilization helps keep 
hollies green and vigorous. Apply cottonseed 
meal or a generous mulch of compost in 
early spring.
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac­
nose. See “Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves 
with moist or brown sunken spots” on page 
238 for more details.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots” on page 237 for controls.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. For control informa­
tion, see “Leaves with powdery white coat­
ing” on page 237.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. C a u se : C anker. S ee 
“Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; branch 
tips die back” on page 238.
Leaves mottled yellow. Cause: Whiteflies. 
These tiny, white, mothlike insects and their 
even smaller larvae feed on the undersides of 
leaves, weakening the plant. Spray leaves (make 
sure you get the undersides, too!) with insecti­
cidal soap, or pyrethrin as a last resort; repeat 
weekly until pests are under control.

124 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Impatiens
Impatiens, balsam. 
Perennials grown as annuals.
In American gardens, the 2 most widely 
grown species of the genus Impatiens are gar­
den balsam (/. balsamina) and impatiens (/. 
wallerana). Garden balsam grows upright to 2' 
with a 1 xh' spread. The clustered flowers resem­
ble small double camellias. Impatiens reach 
6"-24" high and about 1' wide, with open, 
single flowers. Flower colors include white, 
red, rose, and orange.
While many gardeners prefer to buy 
nursery-grown plants, the best color choices 
usually come in seed packets. Sow seed indoors 
8 weeks before last frost. Do not cover the small 
seeds with soil: they need light to germinate. 
Germination time is 5 days for balsam. 2 weeks 
for impatiens. Transplant outdoors 2 weeks 
after last frost.
Balsam can grow in full sun, while impa­
tiens prefer some shade, especially in warm 
weather. These otherwise rather care-free plants 
do not tolerate cold, wet weather. They do 
require slightly moist soil with lots of organic 
matter. Water regularly to keep the soil moist 
but not soggy. Feed balsam once a month to 
maintain the dark green leaf color. Impatiens 
don't need extra feeding: too much fertilizer 
gives ample foliage but few flowers. Pinch 
back young plants for denser growth. Plants 
often self-seed.
Problems
Leaves, steins, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. For controls, see “Leaves, stems, and 
buds distorted” on page 20.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. See "Leaves with large, rag­
ged holes" on page 18 for controls.
Seedlings die. Cause: Damping-off. See 
“Seedlings die" on page 20 for controls.
Ipomoea
Morning glory. Annuals.
These quick-growing tropical vines have 
white, pink, or blue, trumpet-shaped flowers 
that may reach 3" wide. Older types close by 
midday, but new cultivars stay open longer. 
Vines may reach 10' high within 2 months of 
seeding and flower profusely from July until 
November. Use morning glories to beautify a 
fence or wall, or as a temporary groundcover.
Direct-seed outdoors in early April. Soak 
the hard-coated seed in tepid water for 8 hours, 
or notch them with a file to speed germination. 
Place in loose, well-prepared, average soil. Or 
start seeds indoors in 4" pots and transplant 
outdoors after frost.
Full sun is best. Plants require little water 
or fertilizer once established. Insects and dis­
eases rarely attack plants.
Iris
Iris, flag Rulhs or rhi/omes.
Irises offer a huge range of colors and 
patterns, heights, and bloom times, with vari­
ations on a common flower shape and plant 
form. The basic iris flower consists of 3 inner 
(often erect) petals, called standards, sur­
rounded by 3 outer petals (usually arching 
out), called the falls. Long, flat leaves resem­
Copyrighled

IRIS ■ 
125
ble swords or grass; they grow in rather open 
to quite dense upright or arching clumps from 
bulbs or creeping rhizomes.
By far the most popular group is the large 
collection of hybrids termed the bearded irises, 
named for the hairy, caterpillar-like feature 
creeping out of the center of each fall. Rowers 
range from 2" to 7" wide in one of the widest 
color ranges of any plant group, lacking only 
pure red. They bloom in early summer, from 
2" to nearly 5' above stiff, swordlike leaves.
In place of a beard, “beardless” irises 
flaunt a colorful spot, called a signal, or an 
intricate pattern of lines. Blooms on Siberian 
iris (Iris sibirica) rarely exceed 3" wide; they 
occur in shades of white, red-violet, blue, and 
purple (occasionally pinks and yellows) in 
upright, grassy clumps averaging 3' tall. They
bloom as bearded irises stop flowering. Japan­
ese irises (/. ensata, formerly /. kaempferi) 
bear 4'-10" flattish or double flowers in shades 
of white, pinkish lavender, red-violet, blue, 
and violet, often edged, lined, or speckled. 
Most grow to about 3' and bloom a few weeks 
later than Siberian irises.
Very early spring-blooming, bulbous retic­
ulated iris (/. reticulata) hybrids have fragrant, 
narrow-petaled, 3" blooms, mostly in blues 
and purples with orange or yellow signals, 
amid sparse, 4-sided leaves that grow to IV2' 
after bloom.
Most bearded irises are easy to grow, but 
they do have specialized needs. Plant and divide 
(every 3-4 years) in summer or early fall, split­
ting them into individual “fans” with the rhi­
zome attached, or into divisions with a few
What Goes Wrong 
and Whv
(Iris spp-)
Leaves with yellow, 
>1 . brown, or black spc
P. ;• Clause: Leaf spots. Sp 
;• V.V, enlarge rapidly and 
I*;;;-’ coalesce; may have
I • • ' red edges or water- 
.soaked margins 
W \l. R that turn yellow.
1 
II 
vi Leaves with
water-soaked spots; 
rhizom es rotted 
and soft. Cause:
Bacterial soft rot. 
1  
Afflicted leaves 
i  7 
are easily pulled 
from rhizomes; 
leaf bases
rotted and 
if. ftf K
foul-smelling, f f{
Leaves with 
irregular tunnels;
" rhizomes damaged or 
rotted. Cause; Iris borers. 
Leaves wilt, yellow; pests 
bore into rhizomes.

126 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
fans. Trim leaves back before planting to make 
up for root loss. Plant in full sun or very light 
shade and average to rich, well-drained soil. 
Barely cover the rhizome and point the leafy 
end in the direction you want it to grow.
Bearded irises tolerate drought very well 
when dormant (usually beginning about 6 weeks 
after bloom), but water them well until dor­
mancy sets in and after division. Fertilize rou­
tinely in spring and early fall, keep weeds and 
other plants away from rhizomes, mulch loosely 
the first winter after division, and plan to 
stake tall-growing cultivars when in bloom.
Siberian irises enjoy conditions similar 
to those favored by bearded irises, but toler­
ate wetter soil and need less-frequent division 
in spring or fall. Replant as soon as possible 
after dividing.
Grow Japanese irises in much the same 
way, providing shade from the hottest sun. 
Water well before and during bloom. They 
need acid soil and benefit from a few inches of 
mulch in summer.
Plant reticulated irises in fall, about 3" 
deep and a few inches apart in average to 
more fertile, very well drained soil. Grow with 
annuals and perennials to fill gaps left by their 
leaves, which wither by summer.
Problems
Leaves with irregular tunnels; rhizomes 
damaged or rotted. Cause: Iris borers. The 
most destructive pest of irises, these moth 
larvae favor bearded irises, but may feed on 
all species. They seldom bother Siberian irises. 
Borer eggs hatch in spring, producing up to 2" 
long, fat, pinkish larvae. The larvae enter a 
fan at the top and tunnel down toward the rhi­
zome, where they may eat the whole interior 
without being noticed. Borers often introduce 
soft rot bacteria into rhizomes as they feed.
In fall, remove dead, dry leaves, which 
often carry borer eggs, and destroy badly 
infested fans in spring. You can also crush
borers in the leaves by pinching toward the 
base of the telltale ragged-edged leaves or by 
running your thumb between the leaves and 
squashing any borers you find. Check rhi­
zomes when you divide the clumps for this 
pest. If you find a few borers, try cutting them 
out; destroy badly infested rhizomes. In spring, 
dust the base of plants with pyrethrin to kill 
emerging larvae.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. These slimy pests live and 
feed amid dense iris foliage. See “Leaves with 
large, ragged holes” on page 50 for controls.
Flower buds die; petals distorted; growth 
stunted. Cause: Thrips. Several species of 
tiny thrips infest irises; Japanese irises are espe­
cially susceptible. Thrips feed on inner folds 
of leaves, causing stunted growth and russet 
or sooty areas on leaves. Tops of plants even­
tually turn brown and die. Flowers may appear 
discolored, flecked with white, or deformed. 
These pests are difficult to control, for they 
burrow into plant tissue. Don’t buy sickly look­
ing irises that may be infested. Remove and 
destroy severely infested plant parts. Use blue 
sticky traps to monitor and trap pests. Appli­
cations of insecticidal soap may provide some 
control once pests are spotted in traps.
Leaves with yellow, brown, or black spots. 
Cause: Leaf spots. Irises may develop leaf 
spot, caused by several different species of 
fungi, especially in wet weather. Remove 
infected plant parts; clean up debris in fall to 
remove disease spores.
Leaves with water-soaked spots; rhizomes 
rotted and soft. Cause: Bacterial soft rot. Soft 
rot attacks during wet seasons in poorly drained 
soil, entering through wounds in the rhizome 
made by premature leaf removal or cultiva­
tion or carried on the bodies of iris borers. 
Crowded plants in shady locations are more 
susceptible to this disease. Infected rhizomes 
are dry on the outside, but wet, smelly, and 
slimy inside. This rot may start in the leaves

JUNIPERUS ■ 
127
following borer attack. Water-soaked streaks 
appear on leaves, which then turn yellow and 
wilt, starting from the tips. Eventually the entire 
leaf cluster may fall to the ground. Bulbous 
irises are not infected by this particular rot.
Control borers to reduce soft rot infec­
tion; see “Leaves with irregular tunnels; rhi­
zomes damaged or rotted” above. Remove 
and destroy rotting rhizomes. Wash tools when 
cultivating or dividing irises to avoid transmit­
ting the infection. Choose rhizomes carefully, 
inspecting them for signs of infestation; plant 
in well-drained soil with adequate sunlight.
Leaves mottled or streaked. Cause: 
Mosaic virus. Bulbous irises that are stunted 
and streaked with yellow may carry this virus. 
Flowers may be mottled and smaller than
normal. There is no cure for infected plants; 
remove and destroy irises showing symptoms. 
Mosaic virus is spread by sucking insects such 
as aphids and leafhoppers. Control pests to 
reduce risk of infection. See “Leaves, stems, 
and buds distorted, sticky; clusters of small 
insects” on page 51 for controls.
Stems rot at base. Cause: Crown rot. 
Crowded plants are most susceptible to this 
fungal disease. Leaves and stems turn brown 
at the base, foliage turns yellow, and black 
spores may appear on stems. White or brown 
mold may be present. Rhizomes may also rot. 
Dig and divide iris clumps every few years to 
avoid overcrowding. Plant in well-drained soil. 
Avoid damaging crowns when cultivating; keep 
winter mulch away from crowns.
Juniperus
Juniper, red cedar. TVees and shrubs.
Junipers are a large group of evergreen 
trees and shrubs. Foliage in young plants is 
awl-shaped, in mature plants, flat and scalelike. 
In some cases, both types of foliage can exist
simultaneously on the same plant. Plants are 
either male or female; the females bear small, 
berrylike cones. Many species and cultivars 
are valuable in the landscape. Depending upon 
their form, junipers are valuable for founda­
tion plantings, as groundcovers, or even as 
specimen trees. Because they respond well to 
pruning for shape, they also make effective 
evergreen hedges.
Junipers are widely tolerant of all but

128 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
poorly drained soils. They will withstand 
drought and grow in low-fertility soils—even 
seaside conditions. Set them out as balled- 
and-burlapped or container-grown plants in 
spring or fall. Full sun suits them best; grown 
in too much shade, they become spindly and 
unattractive.
Problems
Branches with large galls. Cause: Rust. 
Cedar-apple rust, cedar-hawthorn rust, and 
cedar-quince rust are fungal diseases that spend 
part of their life cycles on junipers, the rest on 
alternative hosts, such as apples and crab apples. 
Large galls form and eventually swell to release 
the spores, especially in warm, moist weather. 
For an illustration of rust galls on junipers, see 
below.
Other than producing the galls, rust does
little harm to junipers. Cut off and destroy or 
dispose of galls before early spring. Avoid plant­
ing Eastern red cedar (Juniperus virginiana) 
and its cultivars, which are very susceptible to 
rusts. See “Leaves with pale yellow spots that 
enlarge and turn orange” on page 25 for infor­
mation about this disease on apples.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. See below for an 
illustration of this pest. See “Plant defoliated; 
branches bear cocoonlike bags” on page 236 
for control measures.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. Several kinds of aphids feed on junipers. 
For control information, see “Leaves wrin­
kled and discolored” on page 235.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. For control 
measures, see “Leaves yellow; stems and leaves
r 
. 
▲  What Goes Wrong
(Jum/JeriLS spp.) w  
and Why
XJ V- -
Vi" Larva
B ranches 
^ 
‘
with large galls. 
fJLD£S
Cause: Rust. Gelatinous 
"horns" form on galls 
in wet weather.
ch tips 
/  webbed together. 
, Cause: Juniper 
webworms. Damage 
usually begins on the 
\  inside of the plant: 
larvae feed inside 
webbed areas.
Plant defoliated; branches 
bear cocoonlike bags.
Cause: Bagworms. Pests 
feed from inside the silken bags 
concealed by twigs and leaves 
from the host plant.

KALM1A 
■ 
129
covered with small bumps” on page 237.
Leaves yellow; whole plant weakened. 
Cause: Juniper mealybugs. The tiny, powdery 
white adults generally congregate on the trunks 
and interior branches, making them difficult 
to see until the plant starts to weaken. Control 
by spraying the plant (especially the bark) 
with superior oil or repeated applications of 
insecticidal soap.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Mites. For control measures, see 
‘‘Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed” 
on page 236.
Branch tips webbed together. Cause: Juni­
per webworms. If left unchecked, this pest 
can kill the twigs. Remove and destroy the 
nests, and spray with BTK or pyrethrin as a 
last resort. See the opposite page for an illus­
tration of this pest.
Needle bases blistered; shoot tips die. 
Cause: Juniper midges. The tiny yellow lar­
vae of this pest feed on the bases of needles, 
damaging shoot tips. Prune off infested parts, 
then spray the whole plant with insecticidal 
soap. Clean up debris around the base of the 
tree to reduce the pest population.
Branch tips browned. Causes: Twig 
blights; cedar bark beetles. Fungal blights may 
attack junipers in spring or summer. These 
diseases spread progressively, killing branches 
or entire plants. Control by pruning and destroy­
ing affected branches on a dry day. Avoid by 
using resistant cultivars, such as J. chinensis 
var. sargentii ‘Glauca’; ask your local nursery 
owner or extension agent for others recom­
mended for your area.
Similar symptoms on recently transplanted 
junipers, or those weakened by drought or by 
the onslaughts of other insects, may be due to 
cedar bark beetles. The white larvae of this 
tiny black beetle tunnel under the bark, some­
times killing weakened trees. The adult bee­
tles chew holes in twig crotches, often causing 
shoot tips to dangle from the branch. The
defense is to keep trees in healthy condition, 
by watering during dry spells and fertilizing 
regularly. If damage occurs, prune off dam­
aged tips. Spray with pyrethrin, making 2 appli­
cations 3-4 days apart.
Kale
Brassica oleracea 
Acephala group (Cruciferae)
Kale is a cool-season vegetable grown for 
its crinkly, blue-green leaves. It is a very hardy 
member of the cabbage family, tolerating tem­
peratures below 40°F In fact, frost improves 
its taste. It is less tolerant of heat than other 
members of the cabbage family. In warmer 
climates grow kale in soil with a high clay 
content if you have a choice, and shade soil 
around roots.
Grow kale as you would cabbage. It is 
occasionally bothered by the same diseases 
and insects as cabbage. See the Cabbage entry 
beginning on page 52 for culture and informa­
tion on problems.
Kalmia
Mountain laurel. Shrubs.
Mountain laurels are broad-leaved ever­
green shrubs with clusters of white, pink, or 
red flowers in spring. They are splendid for 
woodland plantings, shrub borders, or foun­
dation plantings.

130 
■ 
PRC)BIJIM S()1VIN(, PLANT (il IDF.
In the spring, set out balled-and-burlapped 
or container-grown plants. Select a partially 
shaded location (the further south, the more 
shade) with moist but well-drained acid soil 
rich in organic matter. Don’t cultivate around 
these shallow-rooted plants; instead, use a 
deep organic mulch, which will keep weeds 
down and provide the cool, moist root zone 
the plants need.
For information on pests and diseases, 
see the Rhododendron entry beginning on 
page 2(X).
Kiwi
Actinidia arguta, A deliciosa, 
and A. kolomikta (Aetinidiaceae)
Kiwis are vigorous, twining vines. Fruit is 
borne toward the base of new shoots that 
grow off last year's canes. The kiwi found in 
produce markets. Actinidia deliciosa, grows in 
Zones 7-9. A. argul a is hardy in Zones 4-7; 
A. kolomikta is hardy in Zones 3-7.
Grow kiwis in full sun or partial shade in 
perfectly drained soil. Allow about 2(X) square 
feet of trellis or arbor for each plant. Male and 
female flowers appear on separate plants; 
therefore, a plant of each sex is required for 
fruit set. A few cultivars are self-pollinating. 
Check before you buy.
Problems
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Japanese 
beetles. These Vi". metallic blue-green insects 
with bronze wing covers like to feed in the 
sun. Check plants early in the morning while 
beetles are sluggish and knock them into jars 
filled with soapy water. Scent-baited traps may
be effective if placed at some distance from 
plants. Some gardeners find that traps attract 
extra beetles into the garden, so be sure to 
place them well away from the plants you 
wish to protect. Populations of this pest nat­
urally decline by midsummer, but for very 
heavy infestations, spray with neem. For more 
information, see “Leaves skeletonized" on 
page 46.
Vines chewed, bedraggled. Cause: Cats. 
Strange as it may seem, cats like kiwis as much 
as they like catnip. Protect plants with chicken 
wire, if necessary.
Plant stunted; leaves yellow. Cause: 
Crown rot. Kiwis require perfectly drained 
soil to avoid crown rot. Avoid planting in poorly 
drained sites and modify soil enough to assure 
good drainage.
Kohlrabi
Brassica oleracea 
(Jongylodes group (Cmciferae)
Kohlrabi is a cool-season vegetable grown 
for its crisp, bulbous stems. It looks like an 
aboveground turnip. Kohlrabi can tolerate tem­
peratures below 40°F and a pH between 5.5 
and 6.8.
The trick to growing tender kohlrabi is 
encouraging rapid growth. Keep young plants 
well-watered. Harvest bulbs when they are 
2"-3" in diameter; they may become fibrous 
and bitter if allowed to grow larger.
Kohlrabi and cabbage require similar cul­
ture and are attacked by the same diseases 
and insects. See the Cabbage entry beginning 
on page 52 for culture and information on 
problems.
Copyrighted material

IANTANA ■ 
131
L
Lagerstroemia
Lagerstroemia, crape myrtle. Shrubs and trees.
Lagerstroemias, also known as crape 
myrtles, are popular summer-flowering shrubs 
and small trees throughout the warmer por­
tions of the United States.
Lagerstroemias require full sun and a moist 
but well-drained soil enriched with organic 
matter. They will withstand severe pruning in 
early spring and still bloom because they pro­
duce flowers on the current seasons wood.
Powdery mildew can be a serious prob­
lem; choose resistant cultivars. For more 
information, see “Leaves with powdery white 
coating” on page 237. Aphids may feed on 
leaves; see “Leaves wrinkled and discolored” 
on page 235 for controls.
Lantana
Lantana, shrub verbena. 
Tender perennials grown as annuals.
Lantana brings masses of color to con­
tainers, rock gardens, and hanging baskets. 
The quick-growing plants can grow to 4' high
by 8' wide. They are covered with 1 "-2" clus­
ters of small flowers in shades of pink, yellow, 
orange, red, and bicolors. The plants are frost- 
sensitive, although they may bloom through­
out the year in mild areas. Birds, bees, and 
butterflies find the plants quite attractive.
Take softwood cuttings from existing 
plants, or start seeds indoors in midwinter 
(they germinate in about 8 weeks). In warm 
climates direct-sowing is effective. Lantanas 
need full sun and average, well-drained soil. 
Plant V ti apart. Water deeply but let soil dry 
out between waterings. Fertilize lightly; over- 
fertilization or excess water decreases bloom.
Problems
Leaves yellow; plant weakened. Cause: 
Whiteflies. For controls, see “Leaves yellow; 
plant weakened” on page 18.
Leaves and stems with white, cottony 
clusters. Cause: Mealybugs. See “Leaves and 
stems with white, cottony clusters” on page 
20 for control measures.
Leaves m ottled, with shiny black flecks 
underneath. Cause: Lace bugs. Adult lace 
bugs are '/io", flattened, dark insects with lacy- 
patterned wings. Both adults and the tiny 
nymphs feed on the undersides of leaves and 
produce tiny dots of brown excrement. At 
the first sign of damage, spray with insectici­
dal soap, paying particular attention to the 
undersides of the leaves. Use pyrethrin as a 
last resort.
igh

132 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Larix
Larch. Trees.
Larches comprise a unique genus—a group 
of deciduous, needle-leaved conifers. They 
are trees for cold climates.
Set out in spring or fall as balled-and- 
burlapped plants. Plant in full sun in moist, 
acid soil. Larches do not tolerate shade, dry 
soils, or urban conditions.
Problems
Leaves m ined, yellowed, and shriveled.
Cause: Larch casebearers. The tiny reddish 
brown larvae of this moth feed and overwinter 
inside the leaves. Adult moths emerge in May 
or June. Natural parasites usually keep this 
pest under control. For severe infestations, 
apply a dorm ant spray of lime-sulfur to 
branches.
Branches defoliated. Cause: Larch saw- 
flies. In June, the small, wasplike adults lay 
eggs in the side of larch shoots, causing shoots 
to twist. These Xh"-V\ grayish green, caterpillar­
like larvae emerge about a week later. They 
feed on the leaves, starting with lower branches. 
Remove debris, which provides an overwin­
tering site for the pest, from around trees. 
Spray shoots with superior oil to control heavy 
populations.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions. 
Cause: Larch branch canker. This fungus pro­
duces sunken areas on the bark that are sur­
rounded with drops of resin. Cut out and destroy 
affected parts as soon as detected: once 
established, there is no control. European larch 
(Larix decidua) is prone to serious infections; 
Japanese larch IL. kaempferi) is less suscepti­
ble to the disease.
Lathyrus
Sweet pea. Annuals.
These fragrant, climbing annuals make 
excellent cut flowers. Clusters of lavender, 
pink, or white blossoms appear in spring. Plants 
can grow 1-6' tall. Hot weather kills cultivars 
that aren't heat-resistant.
Soak seeds for 24 hours in warm water to 
speed germination. Direct-sow in early spring 
as soon as soil can be worked. Indoors, start in 
individual peat pots about 7 weeks before last 
frost. Seeds germinate in 2 weeks.
Plant sweet peas in full sun in a deeply 
worked bed amended with lots of organic 
matter. Water deeply and frequently. Remove 
spent flowers to prolong blooming.
Powdery mildew can occur if air circula­
tion is poor; see “Leaves with powdery white 
patches' on page 19. If aphids are a problem, 
see "Leaves, stems, and buds distorted" on 
page 20.
Lawns
Good organic lawn maintenance is the 
secret to having an attractive lawn without 
using synthetic chemicals. If you select the 
right mix of grass species for your area and 
maintain soil fertility and organic m atter 
content, you’ll have few problems with insects 
and diseases.
If your lawn is out of condition, or if 
you’ve been relying on synthetic fertilizers

I AWNS ■ 
133
and pesticides to keep it growing, here are 
some steps you may need to take to develop a 
lush, organic lawn.
■ Mow regularly to the recommended 
height for the grasses in your lawn, and leave 
the clippings on the lawn. Grass clippings are 
one of the best organic fertilizers for lawns.
■ Check soil pH, and adjust if necessary. 
Most grasses do best at pH 6.0-7.0.
■ Top-dress your lawn with a ’A"-1/?" layer 
of finished compost, dehydrated cow manure, 
or other fine organic matter.
■ Fertilize once a year—in spring and 
early fall for northern lawns, in spring or sum­
mer for southern lawns.
■ W ater deeply and infrequently to 
encourage grasses to develop deep roots so 
they'll be more drought-tolerant.
■ If your lawn gets lots of foot or vehicle 
traffic or is growing in heavy soil, aerate the 
soil to loosen it and encourage deeper root 
growth. You can rent a motorized or power- 
driven aerator, or aerate manually with a spad­
ing fork. At T intervals all over your lawn, 
insert a spading fork into the turf at a 45-degree 
angle. Push the tines in to a depth of 4". Press 
down slightly on the fork handle to loosen the 
soil, and then pull out the fork.
■ If your lawn has a buildup of thatch — 
undecomposed plant debris at the soil surface— 
thin it out by raking the lawn with a special
LAWNS ♦ Whaand\Vtivr0n8
H ealthy lawn
Adult
M V
1 *' CLtfJ y)
r * Li// •
f|r il
tomy  
:
Tan or 
straw-colored 
spots on lawn.
Cause: Dollar spot.''
Fungal disease 
common in lawns on poorly 
drained soils low In nitrogen.
V  
to 2 " 
Grubs of 
various beetles
Turf thins, turns 
yellow, and dies.
Cause: White grubs.
C-shaped, white beetle 
larvae feed on roots, which [promoted by 
weakens and eventually 
1 thatch and hot.
kills plants. 
dry conditions.
Nymph
. .LT-
Small, 
irregular 
dead spots 
Yellowed round 
lawn. Cause: 
patches on lawn.
Sod webworms. 
Cause: Chinch 
’ests eat blades: 
bugs. Pests give
off an offensive 
odor when 
crushed.

134 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT Gl'IDE
thatching rake, available from nursery suppli­
ers and mail-order tool companies. For very 
large lawns, you will need to rent a machine 
called a dethatcher.
■ 
If your lawn is in bad condition, or 
suffering from severe insect or disease problems, 
you may decide to start from scratch. If so. be 
sure to choose the best grass or mixture of 
grasses for your area. Cool-season grasses, which 
grow the most in spring and fall and are dor­
mant in midsummer, are best for the northern 
half of the country. Warm-season grasses, which 
are dormant in winter and begin growing in 
early summer, are best for the desert south­
west and the Sun Belt. There are many disease- 
and insect-resistant cultivars available. One 
group, the endophyte-containing grasses, hosts 
fungi that produce a substance that deters 
feeding by some insect pests and is actually 
toxic to other pests. Check with your local
e x te n sio n  o ffic e  o r  g a rd e n  c e n te r fo r th e  b est
new cultivars for your areas.
Problems
Turf has bare or ragged patches. Cause: 
Armyworms. These greenish brown caterpil­
lars with white stripes and black heads chew 
grass blades down to the crowns, leaving bare 
areas or ragged patches of grass. They are a 
common pest on bermudagrass during cool, 
wet periods. In the South as many as 6 gener­
ations may occur in 1 year. Spray affected 
areas with parasitic nematodes while larvae 
are still feeding. Spray feeding larvae with 
BTK. Remove dead areas of turf. Reseed and 
overseed with resistant grasses such as the 
endophyte-containing cultivars.
Grass blades yellowed; thinned, brown 
turf. Cause: Mites. These tiny, 8-legged crea­
tures suck sap from grass blades, causing them 
to turn yellow or straw-colored. Heavy infes­
tations can kill plants, leaving turf looking 
brown and sparse. They thrive on poorly fed 
lawns and during dry conditions. Improve fer­
tility and keep lawns well-watered during dry 
spells. For serious infestations, spray with insec­
ticidal soap.
Turf with yellow or brown patches. Cause: 
Billbugs. Billbug larvae are white grubs with 
yellow-brown heads that feed on grass stems, 
causing shoots to turn brown and die. In warm 
weather the grubs tunnel into the soil and 
feed on roots and rhizomes. Billbugs are brown 
or nearly black, •/»"'-'h" weevils. Control grubs 
by aerating the lawn, watering deeply, remov­
ing thatch, and adding organic matter. Reseed 
or overseed with resistant cultivars.
Yellowed round patches on lawn. Cause: 
Chinch bugs. These bugs suck plant sap. caus­
ing grass to turn yellow and die off in patches. 
Adult chinch bugs have 
dark bodies with 
a black triangular pad between white, folded 
wings. Nymphs are tiny bright red insects with 
a white band across their backs. Both adults 
and nymphs cause damage, especially during 
dry conditions. See page 133 for an illustra­
tion of the pest and its damage.
The pests congregate in open, sunny parts 
of the lawn. They smell bad, especially when 
crushed. You may be able to detect the odor 
simply by walking across a severely infested 
lawn. To check for chinch bugs: Remove both 
ends from a large coffee can. Push one end 2" 
into the sod. using a knife to cut the ground so 
the can inserts easily or a board to hammer it 
in place. Fill the can with water. Chinch bugs 
will float to the surface within 10 minutes. If 
there are 20 or more bugs in the can, monitor 
the population weekly, and take steps to con­
trol, if necessary.
Encourage native predators, including 
bigeyed bugs, minute pirate bugs, lacewings, 
lady beetles, and birds. Drive out chinch bugs 
by keeping the soil very moist. Wet it to a 
depth of 6", and maintain that moist condi­
tion for 3-4 weeks. To control chinch bugs in 
small lawns, soak sod with soapy water (1 
ounce liquid dish soap to 2 gallons water).

LAWNS ■ 
135
then lay a flannel sheet over the grass to snare 
the bugs as they are driven out by the soapy 
solution. Pick up the sheet and rinse it out in a 
bucket of soapy water to kill the chinch bugs. 
Rinse the soap off the treated grass by water­
ing well. Seed and reseed treated areas with 
resistant cultivars.
Grass chewed. Cause: Grasshoppers. 
These common insects chew on grass, but 
usually aren’t a serious threat to lawns. Broad­
cast Nosema locustae spores mixed in a bran 
bait (available commercially) as soon as grass­
hoppers emerge in spring: Effects of this 
measure usually aren't realized until the sec­
ond summer after application.
Turf has irregular streaks of brown grass. 
Cause: Mole crickets. These IY2", light brown 
insects have short forelegs and shovel-like feet. 
They are serious lawn pests in the South. The 
crickets tunnel under the lawn and feed on 
grass roots. Infested grass wilts and turns brown, 
so irregular dark streaks appear on lawns. 
Apply parasitic nematodes and water the soil 
well before and after application, or apply 
milky disease spores.
Small, irregular dead spots on lawn. 
Cause: Sod webworms. Webworms sever grass 
blades just above the thatch line and pull the 
blades into a silken tunnel in the ground to 
eat. As they feed and tunnel, irregular dead 
patches appear in the lawn. They are most 
often a problem on bluegrass, hybrid bermuda- 
grasses, and bentgrasses in the South. Web­
worms are the larvae of the buff-colored lawn 
moth, which fly over lawns in late spring. Hot, 
dry conditions and thatch buildup encourage 
the pests.
Control webworms by saturating infested 
areas with a soap drench (2 tablespoons liquid 
dish soap to 1 gallon water) to drive the larvae 
to the surface. Rake the pests into a pile and 
dump them into a bucket of soapy water. Apply 
BTK or drench the soil with parasitic nema­
todes when pests are in their larval stage (usu­
ally about 2 weeks after moths appear). Spray 
severely infested areas with pyrethrin if all 
other attempts at control fail.
Turf thins, turns yellow, and dies. Cause: 
White grubs. These curved, fat. whitish larvae 
of Japanese beetles and other beetle species 
chew on grass roots, leaving sections of lawn 
that appear burned. Damaged turf can be 
easily lifted from the lawn. Ten or more grubs 
per square foot is a serious infestation. Japan­
ese beetle grubs are most common on cool- 
season grasses. Grubs of other species such as 
scarab beetles. European chafers, and oriental 
beetles feed on bentgrasses, Kentucky and 
annual bluegrasses, and fescues.
Walk the turf in spiked sandals (available 
through mail-order catalogs) that will pierce 
and kill the grubs. For a large lawn, apply 
milky disease spores: This treatment will elim­
inate Japanese beetle grubs over a few seasons. 
Apply the material in late spring or fall when 
soil temperature is at least 70°F, but while 
grubs are still present. Or apply predatory nem­
atodes to control both Japanese beetle grubs 
and other white grubs. Water the soil well 
before and after application to improve results.
Turf has brown circular patches. Cause: 
Brown patch. This fungus causes circular areas 
of grass up to 2’ in diameter to turn brown and 
die. It tends to attack St. Augustine grass, 
bentgrass, bermudagrass, zoysia grass, tall 
fescues, and ryegrasses, especially during hot. 
humid weather. Close cutting, poor drainage, 
overwatering, excessive nitrogen, and low pH 
all contribute to brown patch. Control the 
disease by reducing nitrogen fertilization, mow­
ing less frequently, aerating, and dethatching. 
Top-dress with humus-building material. Water 
less frequently and only during the day so 
grass dries off quickly. Rake out dead grass 
and replant bare spots with resistant grasses.
Tan or straw-colored spots on lawn. Cause: 
Dollar spot. This fungus causes tan or straw- 
colored spots the size of silver dollars to appear

136 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
on the lawn. The fungus occurs widely on golf 
greens, but may also be a severe problem on 
low-nitrogen, poorly drained lawns. Aerate 
the soil and improve drainage by top-dressing 
with organic matter. In the meantime, keep 
soil well-watered. Apply a high-nitrogen fertil­
izer; applying seaweed extract is also helpful. 
Mow less frequently, if possible. Overseed in 
fall with resistant cultivars.
Green spots outlined with brown on lawn. 
Cause: Fairy ring. If your lawn has bright 
green circular areas that seem to grow more 
rapidly than the rest of the lawn, the grass is 
probably infected by fairy ring fungus. A ring 
of grass around the green spots turns brown; 
the green areas eventually will brown out also. 
A circle of mushrooms usually develops around 
the edge of the infected area. Rake and dis­
card the mushrooms as they appear. Spike the 
area with a spading fork ever)' day. Water well. 
Encourage beneficial soil microbes by top- 
dressing with finished compost or an organic 
lawn fertilizer. Eradicate the fungus by dig­
ging out the soil in the area of the ring. Dig 
down 2' and extend the hole outward at least 
Tout from the ring. Remove the soil carefully, 
being sure not to spill any infected soil on the 
healthy lawn. Fill in the hole with humusy top- 
soil and finished compost and reseed.
Reddish brown, tan, or yellow patches de­
velop on lawn. Cause: Fusarium blight. This 
disease is common on Kentucky bluegrass dur­
ing periods of hot, humid weather. Infected 
lawns develop spots of reddish brown grass 
2"-6" in diameter. The spots later turn tan and 
finally yellow. Roots will rot and may be cov­
ered with pink mold. Dethatch and aerate the 
lawn. Apply l ”-2"of water each week. Raise 
the mowing height in summer. Don’t fertilize 
in late spring or early summer. Rake out dead 
grass and replant with Fusarium-resistant 
cultivars.
Grass blades have dark spots. Causes: 
Leaf spots; leaf blights. Several fungi cause
grass to develop reddish brown to black spots 
on the leaf blades. Grass shrivels and roots 
rot. Hot. humid conditions favor fungal growth. 
Fight leaf spots and blights by building soil 
fertility. Set mowing height as high as recom­
mended for your grass mix. Don’t mow during 
disease outbreaks to avoid spreading the fungi. 
Keep soil evenly moist. Restore diseased areas 
by raking out diseased grass and top-dressing 
with finished compost. Reseed or overseed 
with resistant cultivars.
Grass water-soaked, blackened. Cause: 
Cottony blight. Infection by Pythium fungi 
causes patches of grass to turn black and look 
water-soaked. In humid conditions a cottony 
mold may appear. The disease usually occurs 
in wet, poorly drained areas that have been 
overfertilized. It spreads rapidly once estab­
lished. Alkaline soils and calcium deficiency 
encourage the disease. Aerate and dethatch 
lawn. Have the soil tested and correct calcium 
deficiency, if necessary. Reduce nitrogen fer­
tilization, particularly in fall. Keep soil evenly 
moist. Maintain slightly acid soil. In severely 
infected areas enrich soil with organic matter 
to improve drainage, and replant.
Circular, scorched patches or pink, gela­
tinous masses on lawn. Causes: Red thread; 
pink patch. Lawns infected by red thread fun­
gus have circular patches of dried grass that 
have red or rusty threads on the blades. Lawns 
suffering from pink patch will develop pink, 
gelatinous masses on leaf blades. These related 
fungal diseases are common on bentgrass, 
bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass, especially in 
cool, humid regions. Apply an organic fertil­
izer with nitrogen in readily available form, 
such as seaweed extract. Mow regularly to 
remove infected leaf tips. Water regularly and 
thoroughly.
Grass blades develop yellow to red, pow­
dery blisters. Cause: Rust. Infection by this 
fungus causes yellow to rusty red, powdery 
spore blisters to appear on leaf blades. Seri­

LETTUCE 
■ 
137
ously infected lawns turn yellow and wither. 
Rust typically occurs in late summer on dry 
lawns lacking nitrogen. To avoid problems, 
water the lawn well in the early morning, so 
the grass can dry off quickly. Fertilize using 
seaweed extract or other nitrogen-rich fertilizer. 
Mow regularly. Rake out dead grass and 
overseed with resistant cultivars.
Lettuce
lactuca sativa (Compositae)
Lettuce is a hardy annual grown for its 
tender leaves. The 3 most common types of 
lettuce are: leaf or bunching, head (including 
butterhead and crisphead), and cos or romaine.
Culture
Lettuce grows best in rich, loose soil with 
a pH between 6.0 and 6.8. It likes full sun, but 
in hot weather does better with light shade in 
the heat of the day. Lettuce needs to grow 
rapidly and without interruption. Provide plenty 
of nitrogen in both quicker-release forms, such 
as blood meal or soybean meal, and slower- 
release forms, such as compost or alfalfa meal. 
Spray the plants with compost tea and/or sea­
weed extract every other week to give them an 
extra boost. Spraying with compost tea may 
also help prevent some fungal disease problems.
L ettuce grows best at tem peratures 
between 60° and 65°F Most lettuce cultivars 
grow poorly above 75°F but will tolerate tem­
peratures as low as 45°F Plants exposed to 
high temperatures will bolt. Prevent bolting 
by providing plants with partial shade in the 
heat of the summer, harvesting promptly, and 
planting bolt-resistant cultivars.
To grow tender, trouble-free lettuce, keep
the soil moist, but not soggy, and do not allow 
it to dry out. Unlike most vegetables, lettuce 
responds well to having its foliage sprinkled 
with water. Plant in raised beds to improve 
drainage. To help prevent disease problems, 
do not plant lettuce in soil where it has been 
grown within the last 3 years.
Lettuce seeds will not germinate if soil 
temperatures are above 80°F In the heat of 
the summer, start seedlings in a cool, shaded 
location and then transplant them into the 
garden.
Various nutrient deficiencies can affect 
lettuce. Boron or phosphorus deficiency causes 
malformed plants. Calcium deficiency causes 
browning of young leaves. Poor heart forma­
tion is a symptom of molybdenum deficiency. 
Copper deficiency prevents heads from forming. 
Spray seedlings with seaweed extract to help 
prevent nutrient deficiencies. Continue to spray 
plants with seaweed extract or compost tea 
every 2 weeks to boost plant health. Do a soil 
test to confirm the deficiency, and amend soil 
accordingly.
Problems
Seedlings rot near soil line and fall over; 
seeds do not germinate. Cause: Damping-off. 
Keep soil moist, but not soggy. Thin seedlings 
and spray with compost tea as soon as first 
true leaves open to help prevent problems.
Seedlings clipped off at soil line. Cause: 
Cutworms. Once a seedling is clipped off, 
there is nothing to do but protect the remain­
ing seedlings from nocturnal cutworm attacks. 
Check for fat, 1 "-2" long, brown or gray cater­
pillars in the soil near the base of plants. Place 
cutworm collars around transplants, sprinkle 
moist bran mixed with BTK on the soil sur­
face in the evening, or add parasitic nema­
todes to the soil at least 1 week before planting 
to control them.
Leaves yellow. Causes: Excessive heat; 
nitrogen deficiency; waterlogged soil. Plants
Cop

138 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PI ANT G il DF.
are stunted and leaves are tough and bitter. 
Temperatures above 80°F will produce these 
symptoms. Prevent problems by planting 
heat-tolerant cultivars and providing partial 
shade for plants in the heat of the summer.
If weather is not extremely hot, the prob­
lem is probably nitrogen deficiency. Spray plants 
and drench roots with fish emulsion or fish­
meal tea to alleviate symptoms. Waterlogged 
soil produces the same symptoms by damag­
ing roots. Keep soil moist, but not soggy. Plant 
in raised beds if drainage is a problem.
Plant yellow and stunted; plant wilts dur­
ing bright, hot days and recovers at night. 
Causes: Wireworms: nematodes. Wireworms 
are yellow to reddish brown, slender, tough­
bodied, segmented worms up to Vh" long, 
with brown heads. Adults are dark-colored, 
elongated click beetles. Apply parasitic nem­
atodes to the soil to control them, and avoid 
planting where sod was the previous year.
Root knot nematodes cause enlargements 
or galls on roots. Control pest nematodes 
by applying chitin or parasitic nematodes to 
the soil.
Young leaves yellow and distorted.
Causes: Tarnished plant bugs: aphids: big vein. 
Tarnished plant bugs are oval, light green to 
brown, ‘A" long insects with triangles on their 
backs. Nymphs are smaller and yellow-green. 
When they feed, they inject a toxin into plants 
that causes distorted growth. Trap them with 
white sticky traps. Treat plants with a com­
mercial pyrethrin spray or dust in the evening 
if infestation is heavy. Till soil after harvest to 
reduce overwintering pests.
Aphids are soft-bodied, small, green, black, 
gray, pink, or white fluffy-coated. sucking insects 
that can spread diseases. For light infestations, 
knock pests off plants with a blast of water. 
Spray plants with insecticidal soap to control 
or with neem or pyrethrin if infestation is 
heavy. Cover plants with row cover when they 
come up to prevent problems.
Big vein is a disease that causes light 
green or yellow, crinkled leaves with lighter, 
enlarged veins. Infected plants are stunted. 
The disease is carried by a fungus and may be 
caused by a viruslike organism. Destroy infected 
plants. Prevent problems by not planting in 
cold, wet soils or where big vein has been a 
problem in the past.
Leaves pale; plant stunted. Cause: Leaf­
hoppers. Leaves may appear stippled. These 
green or brown, wedge-shaped, '/w’-'h" long 
insects feed on plant sap and can spread 
diseases. Treat infested plants with insectici­
dal soap in the evening or with a commercial 
pyrethrin spray or dust if infestation is severe. 
Prevent problems by covering plants with row 
cover when they germinate.
Leaves dull gray-green or silvery. Cause: 
Thrips. Leaves may turn brown and papery. 
These tiny, spiderlike insects can barely be 
seen with the naked eye. To check for thrips, 
tap a leaf over a white paper and look for 
moving specks. Trap thrips with sticky traps 
or spray plants with insecticidal soap to con­
trol them. Try blue, yellow, and white sticky 
traps placed just above plant height to see 
which color works best.
Young leaves are dwarfed, curled, or 
twisted. Cause: Aster yellows. There is no 
cure for infected plants; destroy them. Con­
trol leafhoppers because they spread this 
disease. See “Leaves pale: plant stunted" above 
for leafhopper controls.
Leaves mottled and ruffled. Cause: 
Mosaic virus. Plants are stunted. Destroy 
infected plants as soon as possible. Control 
aphids that spread the disease. See “Young 
leaves yellow and distorted" above for controls. 
Prevent problems by planting resistant or tol­
erant cultivars such as ‘Don Juan, ‘Greenfield', 
‘Montello’, ‘Nancy’, ‘Paris Island Cos', ‘Salad 
Bibb', and ‘Salad Crisp'.
Leaves covered with white powden coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. Older leaves are usu­

LETTUCE 
■ 
139
ally affected by this fungal disease. Infected 
leaves curl, turn yellow, and eventually turn 
brown and die. Spray plants with a baking 
soda solution (1 teaspoon per quart of water) 
or sulfur as soon as disease appears to prevent 
further infection, and thin plants to increase 
air movement.
Leaves with yellow or light green spots. 
Cause: Downy mildew. Undersides of spots 
develop a fluffy white growth. Affected areas 
eventually turn brown. In severe cases plants 
become brown and stunted. Downy mildew is 
a fungal disease common in warm, damp, foggy 
weather. Spray plants with sulfur in the eve­
ning to prevent further infection. To prevent 
problems, plant cultivars, such as ‘Alpha DMR\ 
‘Cal K-60\ ‘Don Juan, ‘El Toro', ‘Erthel\ 
‘M orangold\‘Salad Bibb’, ‘Salinas’,and ‘Tania, 
that are tolerant of downy mildew.
Leaves with dark or water-soaked spots. 
Cause: Various bacterial or fungal leaf spot 
diseases. Destroy badly spotted plants or leaves. 
Thin plants to increase air movement, and 
avoid wetting leaves when watering. Prevent 
problems by keeping plants well-fed.
Leaf margins brown and dried. Causes: 
Tipburn: freezing injury. Tipburn also causes 
dark spots on veins. This condition is preva­
lent in hot weather and is related to uneven 
soil moisture and a shortage of calcium in the 
leaves. To prevent problems, keep the soil 
moist, but not soggy, and do not allow it to dry 
out. Plant cultivars that are somewhat resistant 
to tipburn, such as ‘Cal K-60’, ‘Canasta*, ‘Don 
Juan', ‘Empire’, ‘Grand Rapids TB R \ ‘Green 
Lake'. ‘Mesa’, "Montello', ‘Paris Island Cos’, 
‘Salinas’, ‘Slobolt’, and ‘Waldmann’s Green’.
Temperatures below 35°F cause outer 
leaf margins to turn tan and leaves to blister. 
Protect plants with row cover if low tempera­
tures are predicted.
Leaves with discolored midribs. Cause: 
Excessive heat. Midribs remain firm. Temper­
atures above 80°F can cause midrib discolor­
ation. Cover plants with shade cloth when 
temperatures soar, or plant in partial shade. 
Certain cultivars, such as ‘Ithaca’, are less 
susceptible to this condition.
Whole plant collapses or rots. Causes: 
Bottom rot; lettuce drop; gray mold. Bottom 
rot first infects the lower leaves that touch the 
ground. Dark, sunken spots develop on mid­
ribs, then entire leaves turn brown and slimy. 
Entire plant may be affected in severe cases. 
The same fungus causes diseases on many 
different vegetables, so preventive rotation 
is difficult. Prevent bottom rot by planting 
resistant cultivars such as ‘Canasta’. Lettuce 
drop fungus causes plants to wilt and collapse, 
outer leaves are affected first. Gray mold fun­
gus also starts at the bottom of the plant and 
turns it into a slimy, brown mess. The center 
stem and heart may rot out before the outer 
leaves are affected. Montello’ is tolerant of 
gray mold.
Destroy infected plants or leaves and thin 
remaining plants to increase air movement. 
Prevent problems by working lots of compost 
into the soil before planting, and plant lettuce 
in raised beds to improve soil drainage. Spray 
plants with compost tea every 2 weeks to help 
suppress diseases.
Leaves with wandering, white or translu­
cent tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. Larvae are 
white and maggotlike and burrow through 
leaves, leaving empty tunnels. Adults are tiny 
black-and-yellow insects. Destroy infested 
leaves. Catch adults with sticky traps: try blue, 
yellow, and white to see which color works 
best. Control heavy infestations of adults by 
spraying plants with pyrethrin. Once the lar­
vae are inside leaves, spraying is generally 
useless. Certain parasitic nematodes will at­
tack leafminer larvae in the leaf tunnels. Pre­
vent problems by covering plants with row 
cover when they germinate.
Leaves with small holes. Cause: Rea 
beetles. These small, shiny, black beetles hop

140 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PIANT GUIDE
when disturbed. Treat plants with a commer­
cial pyrethrin spray or dust to control severe 
infestations. Protect plants with row cover as 
soon as they germinate.
Leaves with large holes. Causes: Cater­
pillars: slugs and snails. If there are green 
droppings on leaves and below plants, look 
for caterpillars feeding on leaves. Spray plants 
with BTK to control them.
If there are shiny slime trails on the remain­
ing leaves, slugs and snails are at work. Sprin­
kle wood ashes or diatomaceous earth around 
plants, or trap the pests in shallow pans filled 
with stale beer and empty traps daily.
Leaves cut back or missing. Cause: Ani­
mal pests. Lettuce is a favorite snack for rabbits 
and groundhogs. See “Stopping Animal Pests" 
on page 408 for control methods.
Liatris
Gayfeather, blazing-star. Perennials.
These striking upright plants provide 
bottle-brush-type flower spikes of pink to pur­
ple with stemless, grasslike leaves that become 
smaller as they progress up the spikes. Gay- 
feathers range in height from 3' to 6'; flowers 
open from the tops of spikes downward and 
bloom in summer and into fall.
Plant in full sun. These tough natives of 
the Great Plains tolerate poor to average soils, 
heat, cold, and some drought, but are at their 
best in moist, well-drained soil. Gayfeathers 
may self-sow under optimum conditions but 
are rarely invasive. Cut spent spikes back by a 
third, leaving the rest to produce food for 
continued growth. Tall species and cultivars 
may need staking. Divide every 4 years if plants 
seem crowded.
Problems
Plant fails to thrive. Cause: Root knot 
nematodes. Gayfeathers have no significant 
pests or diseases, but in some states the south­
ern root knot nematode is a problem. Micro­
scopic in size, soil-dwelling nematodes are 
roundworms that feed on roots. Their feeding 
impairs uptake of nutrients and water. Plants 
fail to thrive, but otherwise show few above­
ground symptoms beyond midday wilting in 
summer drought. Root knot nematode feed­
ing causes numerous knobby root swellings 
that don't rub off. Control is difficult; avoid 
planting gayfeathers in areas of known nema­
tode activity. Encourage natural enemies of 
nematodes by adding organic matter to soil; 
solarize infested soil as described on page 
424; rotate nonsusceptible crops into infested 
sites. Soil drenches of neem and applications 
of chitin also help control root knot nematodes.
Iigustrum
Privet. Shrubs.
Privets are opposite-leaved, deciduous or 
evergreen shrubs. They are easy to grow and 
readily lend themselves to pruning, which helps 
explain their popularity for hedges.
Privets will grow in full sun or partial 
shade and tolerate almost all soils except poorly 
drained ones. Set out in spring or fall. They 
benefit from a deep organic mulch.
Problems
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. For control measures, see “Leaves 
wrinkled and discolored" on page 235.
I>eaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. See
opy

I.I I . H M  
■ 
1 41
“Leaves tunneled” on page 237 for controls.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. For controls, 
see “Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps” on page 237.
Leaves with notched margins. Cause: Jap­
anese weevils. The V/', brown adults attack 
foliage, and the legless white grubs feed on 
roots. Apply a sticky coating, such as Tanglefoot, 
to lower stems to prevent adults from climb­
ing up the plants. Drench the soil around the 
plant base with a solution of parasitic nema­
todes. Spray leaves several times with pyre­
thrin for major infestations.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See “Leaves stippled 
with yellow; foliage webbed” on page 236 for 
suggested controls.
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac­
nose. See “Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves 
with moist or brown sunken spots” on page 
238 for controls.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with pow­
dery white coating” on page 237 for controls.
Iilium
Lily. Bulbs.
Hybridizers have created a glorious mix 
of lilies with 3'-12" flowers in a variety of 
distinctive shapes, resembling peaked caps, 
turbans, bowls, trumpets, or broad, curly stars. 
They bloom in shades and combinations of 
white, pink, red, yellow, orange, lilac, and 
green, many dotted in maroon or near-black. 
Plants bear a few to 2 dozen or more flowers 
atop 2 -7 \ upright stems clothed in narrow
leaves. Most lilies are hardy in Zones 3-8, with 
protection in the North, especially during the 
first winter.
Lilies thrive in sun or part shade in deep, 
fertile, moist but well-drained, humus-rich soil 
out of strong winds. Unlike the hard, dense 
bulbs of tulips and daffodils, a lily bulb is a 
fragile package of individual scales joined 
together rather loosely, making it quite prone 
to damage and drying out. Also, lilies never go 
completely dormant; plant them carefully, as 
soon as possible after you receive them. It is 
preferable to plant them in fall, although spring 
planting is quite common. Many specialists 
prepare the soil to 1 xk' deep on a warm fall day 
and mulch the site heavily to keep the soil 
unfrozen and ready for planting in very late 
fall, which is when many dealers ship lilies. 
Most lilies produce roots along the length of 
their below-ground stems, which help to feed 
and support the large plants. Therefore, even 
tiny lily bulbs should have no less than 6" of 
soil above the top of the bulb.
Mark the planting sites to help avoid injur­
ing the newly emerging shoots. As they appear 
in spring (sometimes surprisingly late), care­
fully cultivate and scratch in the first of 2 
organic fertilizer meals for the season. Fertilize 
again before bloom: avoid excessive nitrogen 
applications. Mulch with several inches of com­
post or finely shredded bark to keep the soil 
cool. Water during dry spells. Stake tall lilies 
and deadhead after bloom. After the tops die, 
cut the stems down to a few inches to mark 
the spot for next year. Clear away faded foliage 
and plant debris to remove overwintering pests 
and diseases.
Move or divide lilies only when overcrowd­
ing makes it absolutely necessary; their frag­
ile bulbs and fleshy roots resent any disturbance. 
Dig bulbs after stalks die back; replant imme­
diately or wrap them in a plastic bag of barely 
moist perlite to keep the roots from drying 
out, and store in a cool place. Discard any

142 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLVNT GUIDE
bulbs that appear diseased or damaged. Expect 
minimal growth the first year after transplant. 
Small bulbils or bulblets may form in leaf axils 
or near the base of stalks; harvest and plant 
these at the end of the growing season to 
produce new plants.
Problems
Leaves yellow; plant wilts; bulbs decay.
Cause: Bacterial or fungal rots. Control these 
rots with proper culture: Plant lilies in well- 
drained soil; select a site with good air circu­
lation; avoid excess water in the soil or on 
foliage; dig and cultivate with care to prevent 
injury to bulbs.
Leaves yellow or distorted; bulbs decayed. 
Cause: Bulb mites. These mites are especially 
problematic when bulbs are injured by care­
less digging or cultivation. Sec “Leaves yel­
low or distorted: bulbs decayed" on page 50 
for controls.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. Sev­
eral species of aphids attack lilies, damaging 
plants by feeding and also by transmitting 
viral diseases. Use a strong spray of water to 
knock aphids from plants; do this early in the 
day to allow time for leaves to dry before 
nightfall. Encourage beneficial insects such 
as lacewings and lady beetles. Sprays of insec­
ticidal soap may give control; treat severe 
infestations with neem or pyrethrin.
Leaves with orange or reddish brown spots; 
buds rotted. Cause: Botrytis blight. This most 
common disease of lilies progresses from leaf 
spots to limp, blackened foliage starting with 
the lower leaves and moving up. Distorted 
flowers may have brown flecks. In wet weather 
gray mold forms on blighted plant parts—the 
disease is also called gray mold. Fungus spores 
are present in most soils and are activated by 
cool, wet conditions.
Some lily species and cultivars are more 
resistant to Botrytis than others, but this infor­
mation is not always readily available. Choose 
resistant lilies, if identified, when buying bulbs; 
otherwise rely on good culture and healthy 
plants to limit disease. For tips on buying 
healthy bulbs, see the illustration on page 49. 
In fall, clean up debris where spores overwinter. 
Thin plantings to encourage good air circula­
tion. Remove and destroy infected plants and 
plant parts. Spray weekly with a copper fungi­
cide until the disease is under control.
Leaves mottled; plant stunted. Cause: 
Viral diseases. A variety of viruses cause 
yellowed, mottled, or streaked leaves and 
stunted stem s on lilies. Flowers may be 
discolored. Aphids and other sucking insects 
carry viruses from infected lilies or from carriers, 
such as tiger lilies, that show no disease 
symptoms. Tulips and cucurbits also carry 
viruses that affect lilies. Infected plants even­
tually wilt and die.
There is no cure for viral diseases. Remove 
and destroy infected plants immediately. Wash 
tools and hands after working around diseased 
plants. To limit the spread of viruses, rou­
tinely check lilies for aphids, and control the 
pests if necessary; see “Leaves, stems, and 
buds distorted, sticky; clusters of small insects' 
above for control measures. Buy bulbs and 
plants from reputable sources—some will cer­
tify stock as “virus-free." Do not plant lilies 
in sites where diseases have occurred on bul­
bous plants. Separate lilies from tulips, 
cucurbits, and wild lilies.
Leaves pale above with dusty blisters on 
undersides. Cause: Rust. Powdery pustules 
on leaves lower sides correspond to pale areas 
on the upper surfaces. Provide good air circu­
lation around foliage; avoid wetting leaves 
when watering. Remove infected leaves; cut 
plants back in fall and dispose of leaves and 
stems. Dust or spray leaves with sulfur begin­
ning early in the season to prevent rust or to 
treat a mild infection.
Shoots disappear or do not emerge.

URIODENDRON 
■ 
143
Cause: Animal pests. Deer and groundhogs 
relish lily shoots; rodents enjoy the bulbs. Plant 
lilies where regular human activity will dis­
courage wildlife; pet cats or dogs also deter 
animal pests. Line planting beds with hard­
ware cloth to exclude burrowing rodents; cover 
beds with screen wire in winter. Experiment 
with repellents such as dried blood, human 
hair, or garlic sprays. Some gardeners use a 
few musky-smelling fritillary bulbs planted 
among the lilies to repel animal pests. Keep 
flower beds free of brush and plant debris, 
which offer shelter to hungry wildlife.
Liquidambar
Sweet gum. Trees.
Sweet gums are native deciduous trees 
bearing alternate, star-shaped leaves that turn 
brilliant scarlet in autumn. While a handsome 
tree for the large lawn, sweet gum is intol­
erant of air pollution and is a poor choice 
for urban sites.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
plants, in full sun. A deep, slightly acid, moist 
soil of average fertility is best. Allow plenty 
of room for the tree's extensive root system. 
The plants are slow to establish; a thick layer 
of mulch and regular watering for the first 
few years will promote root development. 
Once they settle in, sweet gums are fairly 
problem-free.
Problems
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
See “Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed" on page 236 for 
controls.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. For controls, 
see “Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps” on page 237.
Trunk or branches with sunken, oozing 
areas. Cause: Bleeding necrosis. It is natural 
for the tree to exude some sticky “gum" from 
the trunk as it grows. However, excessive 
amounts of sap from dark, sunken areas in the 
bark may indicate a disease problem; left 
unchecked, it can quickly kill the tree. Cut 
out diseased areas as soon as you find them.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. See “Plant defoli­
ated; branches bear cocoonlike bags' on page
236 for control measures.
Iiriodendron
TXilip tree, yellow poplar. Trees.
Tulip trees are tall-growing with alternate, 
3-lobed leaves. Yellow flowers appear near 
the top of the tree in late spring or early 
summer. Tulip tree makes a fine specimen 
tree for large properties.
Set out in spring as a balled-and-burlapped 
plant. Full sun and slightly acid, deep, well- 
drained but moisture-retentive soil suits it best.
Problems
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. The small green tuliptree aphid can 
be abundant on the undersides of leaves, secret­
ing copious amounts of honeydew. For con­
trol information, see “Leaves wrinkled and 
discolored" on page 235.
Leaves yellow and drop early. Cause: Lack 
of water. Leaf yellowing is a common problem 
on newly planted trees as well as established
opy

144 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
ones that don't get enough water. Avoid by 
watering during dry periods and using a thick 
layer of organic mulch.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps" on page 237 for controls.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Tuliptree spot 
gall. Circular brown or purple spots surrounded 
by a circle of yellow on the leaves reveals the 
presence of tuliptree spot gall, caused by a 
kind of midge. Damaged leaves may fall early. 
While unsightly, the problem is not serious 
and is best countered by removing all affected 
fallen leaves.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with pow­
dery white coating” on page 237 for controls.
Lobelia
Lobelia. Perennials.
Lobelia's numerous species of annual and 
perennial flowers offer gardeners a broad array 
of plant heights and flower types. Cardinal 
flower (Lobelia cardinalis), perhaps the best- 
known species, features spikes of brilliant red, 
3-lobed flowers that hum m ingbirds find 
irresistible. Other species bear star-shaped 
blooms in shades of blue and lavender; lobe­
lias with red or bronze foliage are also available. 
Plants grow 2-5' tall with a spread of about 2'.
Lobelias prefer shady sites where the soil 
is consistently moist but well-drained. Plants 
tolerate full sun in cool climates, if ample 
moisture is provided, but generally need at 
least partial shade to thrive. Summer mulch 
helps retain much-needed soil moisture; a light 
winter mulch helps protect crowns. Renovate
plantings of these short-lived perennials by 
division or reseeding every 2-3 years. Cover 
seeds lightly to keep them from drying out.
A number of pests may feed on lobelias, 
but damage is rarely significant enough to 
require treatment.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. Aphids 
are sometimes troublesome; see “Leaves, stems, 
and buds distorted, sticky; clusters of small 
insects'* on page 177 for control information.
Leaves with rotted patches or spots. 
Cause: Fungal rots; leaf spots. The moist soil 
conditions favored by lobelias encourage a 
variety of fungal rots and leaf spots that are 
best treated culturally. Remove infected plants 
and plant parts; keep gardens free of plant 
debris and weeds where diseases can over­
winter; space plantings to permit good air 
circulation.
Lobularia
Sweet alyssum. Annuals.
Alyssums are popular, mound-forming 
planLs that bloom from spring until frost. Plant 
size is 3"-8" high and to 10" wide. Flowers are 
pink, purple, or white and appear in multiple 
V " clusters. In numbers, the sweet honey smell 
of alyssum reminds some gardeners of fresh- 
mowed hay. Bees like the aroma, too; use 
alyssum near fruit trees that need pollinating. 
Alyssum is ideal for borders or as groundcovers 
for small areas.
Alyssum likes full sun and well-drained 
average soil. Direct-sow in loose soil 5 weeks 
before last frost. Do not cover seeds; they
Copyright©

LUPINUS ■ 
145
require light to germinate. Seedlings appear 
within 2 weeks. Thin to 5" apart; cut, rather 
than pull out, to avoid damage to intertwined 
roots of other seedlings. Plants may flower 
within 6 weeks of seeding.
Water regularly for best growth, even 
though alyssum can tolerate temporary drought. 
Use a general-purpose fertilizer once in spring. 
Excess fertilizing gives ample foliage but few 
flowers. Flowering mounds tend to become 
sparse and rangy toward midsummer; shear the 
plants back and they will resume blossoming.
Problems
Seedlings die. Cause: Damping-off. For 
control information, see “Seedlings die” on 
page 20.
Stems and roots rot. Cause: Fungal wilt. 
Lower leaves and stems of mature alyssum 
will rot; white fungal strands may be visible 
around the plant base. Plants growing in well- 
drained soil are less susceptible. Discard dam­
aged plants. To avoid transferring the fungus 
to healthy plants, wash your hands and gar­
dening tools after handling infected plants.
Lonicera
Honeysuckle. Shrubs and vines.
Honeysuckles are alternate-leaved shrubs 
and vines. They bear usually fragrant flowers 
that give way to colorful fruit.
Plant honeysuckles in spring or fall in sun 
or partial shade. They can tolerate a range of 
soil conditions, but moist, well-drained sites 
suit them best.
Problems
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves wrinkled and discolored”
on page 235 for control measures.
Leaves with powdery white coating.
Cause: Powdery mildew. For controls, see 
“Leaves with powdery white coating" on 
page 237.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237 for controls.
Leaves rolled and chewed. Cause: Leaf- 
rollers. These V2", green-bodied, brown-headed 
caterpillars form small webs on shoot tips and 
feed on leaves and buds inside. Break open 
webs and handpick larvae; spray BTK at the 
first sign of damage.
Leaves with sunken, discolored spots. 
Cause: Four-lined plant bugs. These 
yel­
low bugs have 4 black stripes on their wings. 
They are active in early summer. Control by 
handpicking; use pyrethrin on leaves for severe 
infestations.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
“Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; branch 
tips die back” on page 238 for controls.
Plant defoliated. Cause: Honeysuckle 
sawflies. The 1", gray-and-yellow caterpillar- 
like larvae feed ravenously on foliage. Handpick, 
or spray shoots with insecticidal soap; use 
pyrethrin as a last resort.
Lupinus
Lupine. Perennials.
Two-foot-long stalks, thick with blue, yel­
low, rose, cream, or bicolored, 
pealike
flowers make lupine plantings early summer 
showpieces. Bright or grayish green, palm­
like, compound leaves add a tropical effect.
Copyright©

146 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Several species occur worldwide, but cultivars, 
especially the Russell hybrids, are favored for 
the array of colors and color combinations 
they offer. Plants range from 1 xt i  to 3' tall and 
form 2' wide clumps.
Lupines are best adapted to areas where 
summers are cool and not too dry. They suffer 
in heat, but serve well as annuals where condi­
tions are not optimal. Full sun and moist, 
well-drained, neutral to acidic soil promote 
healthy growth. Water and mulch to keep soil
moist. Lupines are short-lived, but can be per­
petuated through division. Self-sowing also 
occurs, but seedlings often have different col­
ors than the parent plants.
Lupines attract their share of pests and 
diseases, although most problems stem from 
unfavorable growing conditions. Aphids and 
powdery mildew may appear; see “Leaves, 
stems, and buds distorted, sticky; clusters of 
small insects" and “Leaves covered with white 
powder” on page 177 for controls.
Magnolia
Magnolia. Trees.
Magnolias are alternate-leaved, decidu­
ous or evergreen trees with bold leaves; con­
spicuous, cup-shaped flowers; and interesting 
bright red fruit. They make beautiful specimen 
or accent plants.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
plants. Magnolias grow well in full sun or light 
shade. They prefer moist soil enriched with 
organic matter.
Problems
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. Scale in­
sects are the chief enemy of magnolias. For 
control measures, see “Leaves yellow; stems 
and leaves covered with small bumps" on 
page 237.
Blossoms brown and limp. Cause: Frost 
damage. The flowers of early blooming mag­
nolias are often subject to frost damage. Avoid 
planting sites with southern exposures, which 
can encourage buds to open while there is still 
danger of frost. Or plant later-blooming spe­
cies or cultivars.
Copyrighted material

MALIS ■ 
147
Leaves discolored, wilted, or dropping; 
lacking vigor. Cause: Mealybugs. The tiny, 
powdery white adults generally congregate on 
the trunks and interior branches, making them 
difficult to see until the plant starts to weaken. 
Control by spraying the plant (especially the 
bark) with superior oil or repeated applica­
tions of insecticidal soap.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See “Leaves stippled 
with yellow; foliage webbed" on page 236.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. For more 
details, see “Trunk or branches with oozing 
lesions; branch tips die back” on page 238.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots” on page 237 for controls.
Mahonia
Mahonia, holly grape. Shrubs.
Mahonias are broad-leaved, evergreen 
shrubs. They are used for hedges, foundation 
plantings, and shrub borders.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
or container-grown plants. Choose a partially 
shaded location to avoid winter leaf bum. 
Almost any good, well-drained garden soil will 
suit them; moist, acid soil is ideal.
Problems of mahonias are few and rela­
tively unimportant. Barberry aphid, a small 
yellowish green insect, can be abundant on 
the West Coast; see “Leaves wrinkled and 
discolored” on page 235 for controls. Scale 
insects can attack twigs and sometimes foliage; 
for control information, see “Leaves yellow; 
stem and leaves covered with small bumps” on 
page 237.
Malus
Apple, crab apple. Trees.
Apples and crab apples are trees with 
alternate, deciduous leaves. They produce beau­
tiful spring flowers and attractive red or yel­
low fruit. Apples are common in home orchards. 
Crab apples are valued as specimen trees; 
smaller species can be used in shrub borders. 
Birds are fond of crab apple fruit.
Plant in spring in moist but well-drained 
soil in full sun. They adapt well to a range of 
soil conditions. To avoid removing the follow­
ing year’s flower buds, it is best to prune soon 
after flowering. Keeping the center of the plant 
open to light and air will help reduce disease 
problems. Crab apples commonly produce 
suckers from the roots: cut these shoots down 
to the ground as soon as you see them.
Pests and disease problems on apple trees 
are covered in the Apple entry beginning on 
page 21. Crab apples share many of the same 
problems, including fire blight, cedar-apple 
rust, powdery mildew, and apple scab. For­
tunately, disease-resistant cultivars are available. 
Some of the best include “Adams, with red­
dish pink flowers; ‘Coral Cascade, with white 
flowers; ‘Prarifire, with purplish red flowers; 
and ‘Professor Sprenger. with white flowers. 
There are also many other resistant cultivars, 
so check with your local nursery owner or 
extension agent to learn about the best ones 
for your area.
Be aware that even resistant cultivars may 
have problems if the conditions promoting 
disease are very favorable. Planting trees on 
sites with good air circulation and keeping 
trees growing vigorously are easy ways to avoid 
problems. For more information on crab apple 
pests and diseases, see the Apple entry begin­
ning on page 21.
3l

148 
■ 
PROBI.EM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Melon
Cucumis melo and other genera 
(Cucurhitaceae)
Melons can be challenging to grow, espe­
cially in cooler climates. But if you have the 
patience, there is nothing more satisfying than 
a fragrant, sun-ripened melon.
Culture
Melon seeds need 60°F soil to germinate. 
In northern areas start plants indoors 2-3 
weeks before the last frost date and transplant 
outside once temperatures are reliably warm. 
M elons need lots of sunlight and warm
temperatures—90°F is ideal. Melons are espe­
cially vulnerable to pests and cool tempera­
tures when plants are young. Plants exposed 
to temperatures below 50°F can be perma­
nently injured and fail to set fruit. Cover plants 
with floating row cover or clear plastic tun­
nels as soon as they are set out. If tempera­
tures exceed 90°F inside the tunnels, vent 
them by making a 6" cut in the plastic directly 
over each plant. Remove row cover when mel­
ons begin to flower so insects can pollinate 
the blossoms, or you will not get any fruit. 
In the fall temperatures below 50°F cause 
cold stress and rapid wilting. Cover plants on 
cool nights.
Melons do best in well-drained, loose- 
textured soils with lots of organic matter. They 
prefer a pH between 6.0 and 6.8, but can
blotchcs. or brow n areas. Cause: Gummy stem 
blight. Brown to gray spots on leaves, stems; dark, 
gummy stems: black
spots on fruit. 
N L //L  
r - /0
xThese insects spread 
bacterial wilt.__
\
 
Sticky sap 
\  indicates 
\  bacterial wilt.
s£ k  Vines wilt at m idday, startin g  
/  
w ith younger leaves; leaves 
rem ain green. Cause: Bacterial wilt. 
.As the disease progresses, leaves 
to recover, and die. 
—.
Fruit ro ts on underside. Cause: Damp soil or mulch 
favors disease. Set fruit on wood scraps or tuna cans

MELON 
■ 
149
tolerate a pH as high as 7.6. Melons are 
shallow-rooted and may wilt on hot, dry days 
even when they are not diseased. Keep them 
well-watered, but do not let the soil become 
saturated. Wet soil can cause stems to rot at 
soil level. Overwatering, or uneven watering, 
can cause fruit to split. Potassium deficiency 
can also cause split fruit.
Prevent disease problems by keeping the 
leaves dry. Water carefully or use drip irrigation. 
Mulch melons to help conserve water: Black 
plastic is a good choice for central and north­
ern areas, but in extremely warm areas it can 
warm the soil too much. Organic mulches are 
good, too, but also provide shelter for pests 
like squash bugs.
To reduce problems, rotate crops so that 
no member of the cucurbit family (squash, 
cucumbers, or melons) is grown in the same 
place more often than every 4 years.
The opposite page illustrates some insects 
and diseases that attack melons.
Caution: Melon leaves are easily burned 
by insecticidal soap and copper sprays. Use 
the most dilute spray recommended and apply 
sparingly. Do not spray plants in direct sun. or 
if temperatures are above 80° F and don't spray 
drought-stressed plants.
Leaf and Vine Problems
Leaves with chewed holes. Cause: Cucum­
ber beetles. Adults are V*" long, greenish yel­
low beetles with black stripes or spots. They 
attack young leaves and should be controlled 
immediately, as they spread bacterial wilt or 
viruses. Treat plants with a commercial pyre­
thrin spray or dust.
Leaves with pale green patches; afflicted 
leaves wilt and blacken. Cause: Squash bugs. 
Adults are brownish black, lh" long bugs. Imma­
ture bugs are whitish green with dark heads 
and legs. Both emit a strong, sharp smell when 
crushed. Eggs are bright orange and are laid 
on the undersides of leaves. Handpick adults 
and eggs. Trap bugs by placing a board on the
ground near plants. Lift it each morning and 
destroy the squash bugs hiding underneath.
Leaves with yellow patches; older leaves 
mottled and distorted. Cause: Mosaic. For 
an illustration of this virus, see page 214. 
Afflicted plants are unproductive and fruit is 
bitter. Remove and destroy diseased plants. 
Control aphids and cucumber beetles, because 
they spread the virus.
Leaves yellow, curled, and wilted. Cause: 
Aphids. Look for small, green, pink. gray, black, 
or white fluffy-coated, soft-bodied insects feed­
ing on plants. Aphids can also transmit viral 
diseases. Control them by knocking them off 
the plant with a blast of water, or use with a 
weak insecticidal soap spray; see the caution 
above before spraying. Use foil mulch to keep 
aphids from finding plants.
Leaves yellow and puckered, becoming 
bronzed. Cause: Mites. These tiny. red. yellow, 
or green, spiderlike creatures are worst in dry, 
hot weather. In severe cases leaves dry out and 
drop off. There may be a fine webbing on the 
undersides of leaves. Spray plants with a weak 
insecticidal soap spray to control; see the cau­
tion above before spraying.
Leaves mottled yellow between veins; leaf 
undersides have purple spots. Cause: Downy 
mildew. As the disease progresses, older leaves 
tunTbrown and die. and younger leaves become 
infected. Treat plants with a dilute solution of 
copper spray to reduce the spread of the dis­
ease: see the caution above before spraying. 
Prevent problems by planting resistant culti­
vars such as ‘Morning Dew’. ‘Saticoy’, and 
Tam Honeydew’.
Leaves with powdery white spots, espe­
cially on upper surfaces. Cause: Powdery 
mildew. As the disease progresses, leaves turn 
brown and dry, and plants may die. Treat plants 
with a dilute solution of copper spray to reduce 
the spread of the disease; see the caution 
above before spraying. Prevent problems by 
planting resistant cultivars such as ‘Hales Best 
Jumbo*, ‘Quick Sweet', and 'Starship'.

150 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Leaves with spots, blotches, or brown areas.
Causes: Alternaria leaf blight; anthracnose; 
angular leaf spot; scab; gummy stem blight; 
other fungal and bacterial diseases. Various 
diseases attack melons. Reduce problems by 
keeping the foliage dry when watering and by 
not touching plants when wet. Spray infected 
plants with a dilute solution of copper spray to 
control outbreaks; see the caution on page 149 
before spraying.
Dark brown spots with concentric rings, 
usually appearing on older leaves first, are 
caused by Alternaria leaf blight. As the dis­
ease progresses, leaves curl down and eventu­
ally drop off. Fruit infected with this disease 
has brown, concentrically ringed, sunken spots. 
Prevent problems by planting resistant culti­
vars such as ‘Earligold\ ‘Pulsar’, and ‘Saticoy’.
Yellow spots that turn brown are caused 
by anthracnose. Infected leaves eventually 
die. This disease causes fruit with circular 
black cankers. Prevent problems by planting 
anthracnose-resistant muskmelon cultivars, 
such as ‘Passport’, and resistant watermelon 
cultivars, such as ‘All Sweet’, ‘Crimson Sweet*, 
‘Dixie Lee, and ‘Sweet Favorite’.
Water-soaked spots that turn gray, die, 
and drop out leaving shotholes are caused by 
angular leaf spot or scab. Fruit infected with 
angular leaf spot has small, cracked, white 
spots. Scab causes fruit with sunken, brown 
spots with a gummy ooze, and damage is worst 
in cool, moist weather. Pale, round leaf spots 
with dark margins are caused by Cercospora 
leaf spot.
Brown to gray spots on leaves and stems, 
and dark, gummy stems are caused by gummy 
stem blight. Infected leaves turn yellow and 
die. Disease begins as spots on stems, which 
become streaks; stems then turn dark and 
gummy. When it attacks fruit, the disease is 
called black rot: Infected fruit has round, black 
spots and the fruit flesh collapses. For an 
illustration of this disease, see page 148.
Vines wilt suddenly. Cause: Squash vine
borers. Check for fat, white, 1" long larvae 
burrowing into stems, and masses of yellow- 
green, sawdustlike excrement. Slit stems length­
wise above injury with a sharp knife and kill 
larvae. Cover cut stems with moist soil so they 
will form new roots. Injecting stems with BTK 
or parasitic nematodes may also control borers. 
Spraying stem bases with BTK once a week in 
late spring and early summer may prevent 
damage.
Vines wilt at midday; leaf margins brown.
Cause: Fusarium wilt. As the disease progres­
ses, vines fail to recover, and die. Destroy 
infected plants. Prevent problems by planting 
resistant muskmelon cultivars, such as ‘Pulsar’, 
‘Saticoy’, ‘Savor’, and ‘Starship’, and resistant 
watermelon cultivars, such as ‘All Sweet’, ‘Crim­
son Sweet’, ‘Dixie Lee’, and ‘Sweet Favorite’.
Vines wilt at midday, starting with youn­
ger leaves; leaves remain green. Cause: Bac­
terial wilt. As the disease progresses, leaves 
fail to recover, and die. Cut wilted stem and 
touch the tip of your knife to the sap. If it is 
milky, sticky, and astringent, your plant is 
infected. For an illustration of this disease and 
technique, see page 148. Destroy infected plants 
immediately. Prevent problems by controlling 
cucumber beetles, since they spread the disease.
Fruit Problems
Fruit with spots; flesh may rot. Causes: 
Angular leaf spot: Alternaria blight; scab; black 
rot; anthracnose. Several fungal and bacterial 
diseases cause these symptoms on melon fruit. 
For complete symptoms, controls, and resistant 
cultivars, if available, see “Leaves with spots, 
blotches, or brown areas” above.
Fruit flesh not sweet. Causes: Prema­
ture harvest; overwatering; nitrogen deficiency. 
Harvest muskmelons and honeydews when 
they smell ripe and the stem separates easily 
from the vine when the fruit is gently lifted. 
Harvest watermelons when the bottom of the 
fruit turns from pale yellow to golden yellow. 
Excess rain or irrigation while fruit is swelling

MONARDA 
■ 
151
can dilute sugars. Keep soil evenly moist 
throughout the season. If leaves are small and 
yellow, and growth is stunted, plants are nitro­
gen starved. Spray foliage and drench roots 
with fish emulsion.
Fruit rots on underside. Cause: Damp 
soil or mulch. To prevent rot, support fruit 
on scraps of wood, or tuna cans with ends 
removed. See page 148 for an illustration of 
this technique.
Mertensia
Bluebells. Perennials.
Native Virginia bluebells (Mertensia 
virginica) seem to materialize from the floors 
of eastern forests in early spring. Clusters of 
pink buds that open to tubular blue flowers 
are carried on graceful stems over rounded, 
medium green foliage. Plants grow 1 -2r tall 
and spread to about 1' wide.
Rich, moist, well-drained soil and partial 
shade are bluebells requirements. Plantings 
increase slowly but steadily in sites that resem­
ble their woodland habitat. Leaves yellow and 
die back in summer: plants seem to have dis­
appeared by July. Do not cut fading foliage; 
allow it to die back naturally. Root rot may 
damage bluebells in poorly drained soil; they 
are otherwise trouble-free.
Mint
Mentha spp. (Labiatae)
Mints are hardy (Zone 5) perennial herbs 
grown for their fragrant leaves. They are usu­
ally grown from cuttings. Plant in rich, moist.
well-drained soil with a pH between 5.0 and 
7.5, in full sun or part shade.
Mints are vigorous, trouble-free plants. 
They can be quite invasive once established. 
Let them take over a wild area or plant them 
in containers or in bottomless buckets sunk 
into the garden to prevent them from spreading.
Fungi can cause dark, sunken spots on 
leaves. Spray foliage with fish emulsion, or 
with sulfur if disease is severe. Tan to red 
blisters on leaves are caused by rust. Avoid 
wetting leaves to prevent its spread. Pale stip­
pled or bronzed leaves are caused by mites— 
tiny, spiderlike creatures that thrive in hot, 
dry weather. Spray with insecticidal soap. See 
the Herbs entry beginning on page 116 for 
other possible problems.
Monarda
Bee balm. Perennials.
Brightly colored, spidery flower heads 
and dense, dark green, aromatic foliage attract 
gardeners to these native plants. Hummingbirds, 
bees, and butterflies are also drawn to bee 
balms blossoms, especially the red ones. Plants 
form dense clumps, 2 *5' tall and 3' wide: the 
mintlike foliage remains attractive after flow­
ers fade.
Found in the wild along shady stream 
banks, bee balms favor similar sites in the 
garden —consistently moist, well-drained soil 
and light shade. Giving such favorable sur­
roundings, however, encourages bee balms in­
vasive nature; plantings can spread out rapidly. 
Planted in full sun, bee balms still grow nicely 
but are more easily controlled. Water and 
mulch in summer to prevent water stress, which 
quickly disfigures plantings. Clumps tend to 
die out in the center; divide every 3 years to

152 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
keep growth compact. Remove spent flower 
heads to prolong bloom.
Problems
Leaves covered with white powder. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. This fungus is almost guar­
anteed to appear on bee balm foliage, even 
under the best of conditions. Plants suffering 
drought or overcrowding succumb readily and 
are soon covered with white or grayish mildew. 
Don't let bee balms dry out, but avoid wetting 
leaves, and water early in the day so foliage 
can dry before nightfall. Space plantings for 
optimum air circulation, and keep gardens 
free of plant debris that may host fungal spores. 
Sprays of sulfur and antitranspirants help pre­
vent powdery mildew infections; use sulfur, 
fungicidal soap, or garlic sprays to prevent the 
spread of mild infections.
Narcissus
Daffodil, narcissus. Bulbs.
Today's much-hybridized daffodils are wel­
com e harbingers of spring. Hundreds of 
cultivars, classified by flower type and bloom 
time, blossom in shades of yellow, orange, 
white, and pink; many are bicolored. Each 
flower has a trumpet or cup-shaped center, 
surrounded by 6 petal-like structures; many 
are fragrant. Bluish green leaves are straplike 
and upright, 1 -l'/a' long and W  wide. Plants 
grow from 6" to 1 '/*' tall, depending on cultivar.
Buy daffodils from a reputable source to 
ensure that you gel healthy, pest-free bulbs. 
Look for double- or triple-“nosed" bulbs, 
so-named because of their multiple growing 
points that produce more flowers than single­
nosed bulbs. Plant bulbs in fall, at least 1
month before the ground freezes. Select a site 
in full sun or light shade with humus-rich, 
well-drained soil. Set bulbs 4"-8"deep—roughly 
Vh times bulb height. A location behind annu­
als or perennials helps hide the yellowing foliage 
that remains after flowering ends. Remove 
spent flowers, but allow leaves to die back 
naturally; this lets bulbs store food for next 
year’s floral display. Tying, cutting, or cover­
ing the leaves reduces the amount of light 
they receive and jeopardizes flowering in sub­
sequent years.
Daffodil bulbs multiply gradually to form 
clumps. While plants will grow undisturbed 
for years, overcrowding eventually reduces 
flower size. Dig bulbs after foliage fades and 
shake away loose soil. Place them out of the 
sun to dry for a few days, then gently separate 
offsets from parent bulbs and replant. Small 
offsets may take a couple of years to bloom.
Don’t worry about the animal pests that 
eat most other bulbs; daffodils’ bitter taste 
deters feeding wildlife. Choose bulbs care­
fully to avoid most other pests and diseases; 
see the illustration “Buying Healthy Bulbs” on 
page 49.
Problems
Flowers and leaves with silvery flecks.
Cause: Thrips. Flower thrips rasp daffodil leaves 
and flowers, causing silvery or whitish flecks; 
leaves eventually turn brown and die. They 
reproduce and spread rapidly, especially in 
dry areas. O ther symptom s include leaf 
browning. These pests burrow into plant tis­
sue and are difficult to control. Inspect bulbs 
carefully. Remove and destroy severely infested 
plant parts. Use blue sticky traps to monitor 
and trap pests. Applications of insecticidal 
soap may provide some control once pests are 
spotted in traps.
Leaves with white or brown streaks; foliage 
wilted. Cause; Viral decline. Plants suffering 
from viral decline develop white or brown

MCOT1ANA 
■ 
153
streaks on the leaves late in their growing 
season. Foliage may wilt and topple over. There 
is no cure for decline. Remove diseased plants. 
Control aphids, which spread decline and other 
viral diseases; for control techniques, see 
“Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects’ on page 51.
Plant fails to appear; bulbs soft. Cause: 
Bulb flies. Narcissus bulb flies resemble small 
bumblebees; lesser bulb flies are Vj" long, 
blackish green flies. Both lay their eggs at the 
base of bulb leaves; larvae hatch and bore 
into bulbs to feed—usually 1 maggot per bulb 
in the case of narcissus bulb flies and several 
per bulb in the case of lesser bulb flies. Their 
holes admit rot organisms into bulbs. Discard 
infested bulbs. If bulb flies are a problem in 
your area, try covering plants with floating 
row cover during the egg-laying period (late 
spring). Treat plants weekly with a commer­
cial pyrethrin dust if pests have been a prob­
lem in past years.
Plant stunted; flowers deformed. Cause: 
Basal rot. Infection by Fusarium basal rot 
causes the base of the bulb to turn soft and 
brown. The rot spreads up through the bulb. 
Infected plants are stunted and have few flow­
ers. Dig and destroy bulbs that show signs of 
disease. Avoid injuring bulbs during planting 
or cultivation: fungi most often infect bulbs 
through wounds.
Plant fails to grow and/or flower; leaves 
with swollen spots. Cause: Bulb and stem 
nematodes. Feeding by microscopic round­
worms causes deformed leaves with yellow- 
green spots and small, swollen areas. Bulbs 
develop dark internal circles or blotches and 
may fail to grow or bloom in spring. Dig and 
destroy severely infected bulbs and foliage. 
Soak mildly infested bulbs in hot (110°F) water 
for 3 hours, then plunge them immediately 
into cold water. Let them dry and store in a 
cool, dark place until fall when they can be 
replanted. Solarize infected soil or treat with a 
chitin source.
Nicotiana
Flowering tobacco. .Annuals.
For both fragrance and color, nicotiana 
belongs in every summer garden. Clusters of 
sweetly fragrant, starlike, tubular flowers appear 
in red, pink, lime, lavender, or white. Group 
these 1 -3' tall plants together for best showing. 
Older kinds bloom in evening only, but new 
offerings bloom in daylight. Night-blooming 
whites are most fragrant; day-blooming culti­
vars are much less fragrant. New blossoms 
open each day to replace spent ones.
Sow seed indoors in April: bottom heat 
will speed germination. Or. direct-seed out­
doors in late spring. Do not cover very small 
seeds, which need light to germinate. Seed­
lings appear within 3 weeks and grow rapidly. 
Thin or transplant to 9" apart. Nicotiana grows 
best in average soil in full sun or partial shade. 
Water well during hot, dry weather. Give less 
fertilizer and water in late summer to keep 
plants blooming longer. Nicotiana self-sows 
but may not come true to color.
Do not grow nicotiana in dusty areas: the 
sticky, fuzzy leaves attract and hold dirt. Also, 
do not plant near tomatoes. Nicotianas may 
attract insect pests and diseases that seldom 
seriously bother this hardy plant, but will 
quickly move on to any nearby tomatoes.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. For controls, see “Leaves, stems, and 
buds distorted” on page 20.
Leaves yellow; plant weakened. Cause: 
Whiteflies. See “Leaves yellow; plant weak­
ened” on page 18 for controls.
Seedlings or young plants cut off at soil 
level. Cause: Cutworms. For control measures, 
see “Seedlings or young plants cut off at soil 
level” on page 20.

154 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOI.VING PIANT GLIDE
Okra
Abelmoscbus esculentus ( Malvaceae)
Okra is an annual vegetable grown for its 
fleshy seed pods. Okra does best in loose, 
well-worked soil with a pH between 6.0 and 
7.0. and full sun. It needs lots of phosphorus, 
so work in plenty of bonemeal and compost 
before planting.
Okra grows best at temperatures between 
70° and 85°F and does not tolerate tempera­
tures below 60°F
Warm soil at planting time is very impor­
tant. Wait until the soil is at least 60°F before 
planting. Okra does not germinate well and is 
more susceptible to pests in cooler soil. If you 
have cool soils with high clay content, cover 
the planting area with clear plastic to warm up 
the soil at least 2 weeks before you want to 
plant. Cover planted seeds with clear plastic 
or row cover for a few weeks to give them a 
good start. Remove the clear plastic as soon 
as seeds germinate to avoid damaging the seed­
lings. Okra does well with black plastic mulch 
because it warms the soil.
Okra is susceptible to several common 
vegetable crop problems, including damping- 
off, aphids, fungal wilts, leafminers, and mites. 
See the Vegetables entry beginning on page 
245 for symptoms and controls.
Problems
Leaves turn yellow, wilt, and fall off; stem 
rotted at soil line. Cause: Southern blight. 
White to pink fungal growth may spread over 
the soil around the base of infected plants. 
Severely infected plants die. Destroy infected 
plants and dig out and dispose of the top few 
inches of soil within 6" of the stem. Add­
ing lots of compost to the soil helps prevent 
this disease.
Plant yellow and stunted, wilts during 
bright, hot days; roots have swollen galls. 
Cause: Root knot nematodes. Galls may be 
up to 1" in diameter. Destroy infected plants. 
Control pest nematodes by adding chitin and 
parasitic nematodes to the soil.
Buds, flowers, and seed pods malformed 
and drop prematurely. Cause: Stink bugs. Seed 
pods may have hard, callused bumps. Adults 
are flat, shield-shaped, green, blue, or red 
insects that emit a sharp odor when crushed. 
Handpick these pests to control mild infesta­
tions. Spray plants with pyrethrin if injury is 
serious.
Flowers turn brown; seed pods rot.
Causes: C hoanephora blight; gray mold. 
Infected parts may be covered with white or 
gray growth. Spray plants with compost tea as 
soon as plants start to bloom and repeat every 
few weeks to help prevent these fungal diseases, 
or with sulfur to keep mild infections from 
spreading.
Copyrighted ma'

ONION 
■ 
155
Seed pods with chewed holes. Cause: 
Caterpillars. Leaves may also have holes. Hand- 
pick or spray plants with BTK if you see cater­
pillars.
Seed pods pitted, discolored, or with water- 
soaked areas. Cause: Cold injury. Prevent dam­
age by protecting plants with row cover when 
cold nights are expected.
Onion
AlHum cepa and other species 
(Liliaceae)
Onions are biennial vegetables grown for 
their sweet to pungent bulbs and greens. Dried 
or fresh, raw or cooked, onions are an indis­
pensable ingredient in a variety of soups, salads, 
breads, and casseroles.
Culture
Onions grow best in full sun and deep, 
fertile, well-drained soil with lots of organic 
matter. Work in a generous amount of com­
post before planting. Onions need high levels 
of nitrogen and potassium and moderate to 
high levels of phosphorus, so do a soil test and 
amend soil as needed before planting. Onions 
grow well in raised beds or ridges, especially if 
soil is clayey.
Onions grow best between 55° and 75° F 
and will tolerate temperatures as low as 45° 
and as high as 85°F They prefer cool temper­
atures early in their growth and warm temper­
atures near maturity.
Keep the soil moist since onions have 
shallow roots, but don't allow soil to become 
saturated because onions are susceptible to 
several root rot diseases. Mulching onions with 
composted leaves or straw is highly recom­
mended to maintain soil organic content, help 
prevent disease, and keep down weeds. Wait 
until soil warms to apply mulch.
To help prevent populations of disease 
organisms from building up in the soil, avoid 
planting onions where onion family members 
have been grown during the previous 3 years. 
In general, white onions are more prone to 
problems than yellow or red ones.
You can grow onions from seeds, trans­
plants, or sets. Discard any diseased sets or 
transplants. Soak sets, roots, or seeds in com­
post tea for 15 minutes before planting to help 
prevent disease. Dust the roots of sets and 
plants with bonemeal after soaking and before 
planting to give them a good start.
Onion bulb formation is controlled by 
day length, so selecting suitable cultivars for 
your area is crucial. In the North choose “long- 
day” cultivars. and in the South choose “short- 
day" cultivars.
Allow tops to fall over naturally, then pull 
bulbs and let them air-cure for 2 weeks. After 
curing, sort out damaged bulbs and those with 
thick necks and put aside for immediate use. 
Store others at temperatures just above 32°E
Plant and Leaf Problems
Seedlings fall over. Cause: Damping-off. 
Prevent problems by planting in raised beds 
and presoaking seed in compost tea.
Plant wilts rapidly. Cause: Cutworms. 
Check for a hole in the stem at or just below 
the soil line and fat, 1 "-2" long, dull brown or 
gray caterpillars in the soil near the base of 
plants. Sprinkle moist bran mixed with BTK 
on the soil surface in the evening, or add 
parasitic nematodes to the soil at least a week 
before planting to control them.
Plant stunted; leaves may be yellow. 
Causes: Nitrogen deficiency: waterlogged soil; 
aphids; pink root. Onions need ample nitrogen, 
deficient plants are pale and grow slowly. Water­
logged soil damages roots and produces the

156 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
same symptoms. Spray plants and drench roots 
with fish emulsion or fish-meal tea to alleviate 
symptoms. Plant in raised beds to improve 
drainage and add compost before planting to 
prevent problems.
Aphids are soft-bodied, pale green, black, 
gray. pink, or white fluffy-coated. sucking 
insects. Check for them on young leaves. For 
mild infestations, knock the pests off the plants 
with a blast of water. Spray plants with insecti­
cidal soap to control them, or with a commer­
cial neem or pyrethrin spray if infestation is 
severe.
If roots and bulb are pinkish, the plant 
has pink root. Roots infected with this fungal 
disease shrivel and die. Destroy infected plants. 
Prevent problems by ensuring good drainage 
and adding ample organic matter to the soil. 
Plant resistant cultivars such as ’Crystal Wax 
Pickling’, ‘Early White Supreme', ‘Hybrid Big 
Mac’, ‘J K Special’, ‘Tokyo Long W hite, ‘Uno 
Grande PPR \ and Voyager'.
Plant yellow and wilted. Causes: Fusar­
ium bulb rot; onion maggots: lesser bulb flies: 
wireworms. Onions infected with Fusarium 
bulb rot have soft necks, and entire bulbs may 
be soft and brown. Destroy infected plants. 
Prevent problems by planting cultivars. such 
as 'Long White Summer Bunching', ‘Northern 
Oak', ‘Sentinel*, and ‘Valiant’, that are some­
what resistant.
Onion maggots feed on roots, killing seed­
lings and older plants. They also burrow into 
bulbs, making them unfit for use. Onion mag­
gots are V*" long, white, and taper to a point at 
the head. Adults are small gray flies that lay 
eggs early in the spring. Destroy infested plants. 
Do not compost them; onion maggots thrive 
in compost piles. To prevent problems, apply 
parasitic nematodes to the soil before plant­
ing and cover plants with row cover as soon as 
they come up to prevent flies from laying eggs. 
Trap maggots by planting a few onions at scat­
tered points around the garden a few weeks
before the main planting date. These larger 
plants attract egg-laying adults, remove and 
destroy them when infested. ‘Egyptian Tree' 
onions are tolerant of onion maggots. In general, 
white cultivars are more susceptible to mag­
got attack than are yellow or red cultivars.
Lesser bulb fly larvae are Vi' long, 
wrinkled, and yellow-gray. They cause injury 
similar to onion maggots and are controlled 
the same way.
Yellow to reddish brown, slender, tough- 
bodied, segmented worms up to IV2" long 
feeding on roots and bulbs are wireworms. 
Adults are dark-colored, elongated click beetles. 
Apply parasitic nematodes to the soil before 
planting to control them.
Leaves with white streaks or blotches. 
Causes: Precipitation damage: thrips. Exces­
sive rain or hail can spot onion leaves. Spots 
are various sizes, and damage doesn't spread. 
Maintain good air circulation and make sure 
soil is well-drained to minimize problems.
If leaf tips are distorted or brown, and 
leaves are stippled with white, look for onion 
thrips. Heavy- infestations cause plants to wither 
and turn brown. Adults are tiny, slender, yel­
low to brown, rapidly moving, winged insects. 
The larvae can barely be seen with the naked 
eye. Thrips thrive in hot. dry weather. Trap 
them with sticky traps hung just above plant 
level. Try blue, yellow, and white traps to see 
which work best. Treat plants with insectici­
dal soap or a commercial pyrethrin spray or 
dust to control severe infestations.
Leaves with water-soaked or papery, white 
spots with vertical splits. Cause: Onion leaf 
blight. Leaf tips turn yellow, then brown. Spray 
plants with sulfur as soon as you see symp­
toms if weather is cool and humid. Prevent 
problems by planting tolerant cultivars such 
as Tokyo Long White'.
Leaves with pale green to brown spots. 
Causes: Downy mildew; ozone injury. Leaf 
tips turn yellow, then brown, and may be cov­

ONION 
■ 
157
ered with a fuzzy mold. As the disease 
progresses, spots turn black with a purple, 
fuzzy mold, and leaves yellow and die. Downy 
mildew thrives in cool, humid weather and 
tends to stop spreading when the weather is 
warm and dry. Spray plants with sulfur to 
prevent the disease from spreading in cool, 
wet weather. Don't handle plants when wet to 
avoid spreading the disease.
Irregular areas with tiny brown flecks are 
caused by high levels of ozone in the air. Spray 
plants with seaweed extract and fish emulsion 
to encourage new growth.
Leaves with sunken, light-colored spots 
with concentrically ringed, purple centers. 
Cause: Purple blotch. Spots enlarge and gir­
dle leaves, which wither and fall over. Spray 
plants with sulfur if disease is present to keep 
it from spreading. Cool soil makes plants more 
prone to this fungal disease. Warm soil by 
covering it with clear plastic for a few weeks 
before you plant.
Leaves with small reddish orange blisters. 
Cause: Rust. Leaves infected with this fun­
gal disease may turn yellow and die. Bulbs are 
small. Clean up and dispose of tops to elimi­
nate overwintering spores. One type of rust 
infects both onions and asparagus, so keep 
the 2 crops apart to prevent problems.
Leaves with black streaks filled with dark 
brown powder. Cause: Smut. Young plants 
are usually affected. Cool soil makes plants 
more prone to this fungal disease. Warm soil 
by covering it with clear plastic for a few 
weeks before you plant. Prevent problems by 
planting tolerant cultivars such as ‘Evergreen 
Hardy White' and ‘Tokyo Long White'.
Bulb Problems
Bulbs small and soft; roots pinkish or 
shriveled. Cause: Pink root. See “Plant 
stunted; leaves may be yellow" on page 155 
for controls.
Bulbs rot in the ground. Cause: White
rot. Bulbs may be covered with a white fluffy 
growth. Destroy infected plants; don’t com­
post them. Prevent problems by providing 
good drainage and presoaking seeds in com­
post tea.
Bulbs with gray, water-soaked outer layers.
Cause: Heat or cold injury. If temperatures 
are above 85°F, protect plants with a thick 
straw mulch and keep soil moist. Protect over­
wintering onions with mulch, or dig and store 
just above freezing.
Bulbs with bleached, soft patches. Cause: 
Sunscald. Protect onions from direct sun while 
curing, especially in hot weather. White culti­
vars are especially sensitive to sunscald.
Bulbs with thick necks that do not cure 
well. Causes: Potassium deficiency: seed stalk 
formation. Confirm deficiency with soil test 
and amend soil as needed before planting. 
Use bulbs with thick necks first.
Onions form seed stalks after any dor­
mant period. Improperly stored sets or culti­
vars not suited to the day length in your area 
may go to seed before forming bulbs. Fluctu­
ating temperatures or drying and wetting of 
soil may cause seed stalk formation. Harvest 
and use bulbs as soon as possible.
Bulbs with dark green or black, concen­
trically ringed spots. Cause: Onion smudge. 
This fungal disease usually appears near har­
vest or in storage. Destroy infected bulbs. Pre­
vent problems by planting tolerant cultivars 
such as ‘Downings Yellow Globe’, ‘Early Yel­
low Globe', and ‘Southport Red Globe'.
Bulbs with sunken, dry, brown to black 
areas around neck. Cause: Neck rot. Necks of 
bulbs rot and gray mold develops inside bulbs. 
This fungal disease usually appears near har­
vest or in storage. Destroy infected bulbs. To 
prevent problems, cut back on watering as 
onions begin to mature, especially near harvest. 
Be careful not to injure bulbs while weeding 
or harvesting. Cure bulbs properly before stor­
ing them in a cool place.

158 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Oregano
Origanum beracleoticum (Labiatae)
Oregano is a hardy (Zone 5) perennial 
herb grown for its aromatic leaves. Start oreg­
ano from cuttings or plants rather than from 
seed. Seedlings are quite variable and may 
have very little flavor. Oregano does best in
average, well-drained soil with a pH between 
5.0 and 8.0, and at least 4 hours of sun per day. 
Oregano needs little added fertilizer or water, 
but does like a layer of mulch to protect its 
shallow roots.
Oregano is usually quite trouble-free. 
Pale, stippled, or bronzed leaves are caused 
by mites—tiny, spiderlike creatures that thrive 
in hot, dry weather. Control them with insecti­
cidal soap spray. See the Herbs entry begin­
ning on page 116 for other possible problems.
Pachysandra
Parhysandra, spurge. Perennials.
Low-growing pachysandras top the list of 
durable, shade-tolerant groundcovers. These 
hardy, 8"-12" plants with glossy evergreen foliage 
spread quickly, providing excellent cover below 
trees and on slopes. Clusters of tiny, tubular, 
white flowers appear in late spring.
Plant in slightly acid, moist but well-drained 
soil rich in organic matter. Mature plants endure
drought, but do best with about 1" of water 
per week. Full sun may scorch variegated cul­
tivars; give partial to deep shade. Pachysan­
dras compete well with taller plants and prosper 
in shady sites where few other plants will grow. 
Cut back by about one-quarter in spring to 
promote compact growth.
Most problems arise when plantings are 
stressed by drought, poorly drained soil, or 
overcrowding. Fungal diseases favor damp, 
crowded conditions; thin to improve air cir­
culation and remove infected plants. Scale 
insects also prefer tightly spaced plantings, 
where their populations swell rapidly if unde­

PAEONIA ■ 
159
terred. Spider mites infest drought-stressed 
plants when weather is hot and dry; water 
adequately and use a strong stream of water 
to knock pests off.
Paeonia
Peony. Perennials.
Attractive, long-lived, bushy plants that 
bear numerous 3"-6" blossoms, peonies are 
the perennial gardener’s dream come true. 
Early summer flowers arrive in shades of pink, 
red. white, and yellow amid glossy, lobed, green 
foliage; plants form neatly rounded clumps 
roughly 3'-4' tall.
Peonies prefer full sun and moist, well- 
drained. richly organic soil, although light shade 
is tolerated and may prolong bloom in the 
South. A protected site limits wind damage to 
blossoms. Most are hardy to Zone 5 and do 
best in cold-winter climates.
Easy to care for in most respects, peonies 
are finicky about planting. Set rootstocks so 
that the reddish buds or “eyes’* are no more 
than l"-2" below the soil surface. Mulch after 
the ground freezes the first winter after plant­
ing to prevent heaving. Divide roots in fall, if 
necessary, leaving at least 3 buds on each 
section. Cut stems back to below ground level 
in fall.
Problems
Flower buds absent. Causes: Improper 
planting: excess shade; immature plant; large, 
old crown; excess nitrogen; disturbed roots. 
Choose planting sites carefully; set roots at 
the proper depth; be patient with new plants. 
Do not apply high-nitrogen fertilizers. If mature 
peonies stop blooming, rule out other possi­
ble problems and divide if needed—division 
and other root disturbances also reduce bud 
formation.
Flower buds don’t open. Causes: Late 
spring frost; drought: high temperatures; low 
soil fertility. Weather extremes notwithstanding, 
water adequately and feed peonies with com­
post or a slow-acting, general-purpose fertil­
izer in spring. If summer heat is the problem, 
plant early flowering cultivars.
Flower buds die or petals distorted. Cause: 
Flower thrips. These ‘/is" insects feed on buds, 
stem tips, and flowers, causing distortion or 
white, brown, or red flecks. Thrips are hard to 
control because they burrow into plant tissue. 
Remove and destroy infested plant parts. 
Encourage natural predators such as pirate 
bugs, lacewings, and lady beetles. Use blue 
sticky traps to monitor and trap pests. Insecti­
cidal soap sprays may provide some control 
once pests appear on traps.
Stems with sunken lesions. Cause: 
Anthracnose. Sunken lesions with pink blis­
ters appear on stems. Plants may die. Cultural 
controls such as regular fall cleanup and thin­
ning stems to improve air circulation are 
effective. Treat severe problems with copper 
fungicide sprays.
Shoots wilt, collapse; crowns with gray 
mold. Cause: Fungal diseases. Several fungi 
cause blights or stem and crown rots in peonies. 
Botrytis blight causes shoots to wilt suddenly 
and fall over. Stem bases blacken and rot; gray 
mold may appear near soil; buds may wither 
and blacken. Flowers and leaves may turn 
brown and develop mold. Remove and destroy 
infected plant parts. Don’t put manure near 
plant crowns; clear mulch from crowns in 
spring to let soil dry. Avoid overwatering and 
wet, poorly drained soil. If problems persist, 
scrape away the top 2" of soil around plants 
and replace with clean sand. In spring, spray 
shoots with bordeaux mix.
Plant stunted; leaves yellow, spotted; roots 
with tiny galls. Cause: Root knot nematodes. 
Feeding by these microscopic pests reduces 
roots’ ability to take up water and nutrients. 
Control root knot nematodes by applying chitin

160 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
or parasitic nematodes to soil. Also promote 
natural nematode controls by increasing soil 
organic matter. Drenching soil with neem may 
provide some control. In severe cases, remove 
plants, solarize the soil, and replant with 
nematode-free stock.
Papaver
Poppv. Perennials.
History has heaped symbolism upon the 
brightly colored blooms of poppies, yet these 
broad, crinkled flowers burst forth undeterred 
in spring and early summer. The diminutive 
alpine poppy (Papaver alpinum) offers 1" 
blooms and 8'-10" height, while Iceland poppy 
[P nudicaule) and Oriental poppy (P orientate) 
can exceed 1' in height and spread, with 3"-7” 
flowers. Deeply divided, hairy; gray-green foliage 
surrounds leafless flower stems, each with a 
single bloom.
Most poppies are very hardy and per­
form best in cool summers and cold winters; 
grow plants as annuals in warmer climates. 
Full sun to light shade and well-drained soil 
satisfy poppies’ needs; established plants tol­
erate some drought, but soggy soil guarantees 
rotting of fleshy roots. Foliage dies back after 
flowering ends, and plants disappear by late 
summer. Mark the spot to avoid digging injury 
to roots. New leaves appear in fall. Divide 
every 5 years, in late summer, to maintain 
vigor. Poppies self-sow if allowed to set seed; 
seedlings may not come true to parents.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. See 
“Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects’ on page 177 for 
controls.
Leaves with water-soaked spots; foliage 
and flowers blacken. Cause: Bacterial blight. 
Infected plants turn brown and lose leaves; 
girdled stems die. Dig and destroy infected 
plants and surrounding soil. Solarize soil before 
replanting with disease-free seed: water early 
in the day so leaves dry quickly.
Parsley
Petroselinum crispum ( I  mbelliferae)
Parsley is a biennial herb grown as an 
annual for its leaves. Sow seed outdoors once 
the soil has reached 50°F: it takes 3 weeks to 
germinate. Plant in cool, moist, well-drained 
soil with a pH between 5.0 and 8.0. It needs at 
least 3 hours of full sun daily.
Parsley has few problems. Handpick leaf- 
eating caterpillars or spray plants with BTK. 
Dwarfed or abnormally crinkled leaves can be 
caused by viruses. Destroy infected plants, and 
control aphids and other sucking insects that 
spread viral diseases. Dark, yellow-bordered 
spots are leaf blight caused by fungi. Spray 
with fish emulsion or with sulfur if disease is 
severe. Carrot weevils eat roots and make leaves 
yellow: for controls, see “Roots with dark tun­
nels” on page 61. See the Herbs entry beginning 
on page 116 for other possible problems.
Parsnip
Pastinaca saliva (limbelliferae)
Parsnips are biennial vegetables grown 
for their long, white, sweet-flavored roots. Cul­
ture is much like that of carrots, except that

PEA 
■ 
161
parsnips require less fertilizer and prefer a pH 
between 6.0 and 6.8. They grow best at tem­
peratures between 60° and 64°F poorly above 
75°H and tolerate temperatures as low as 40°E 
Parsnip seed can take 3 weeks to germinate. 
Soak seed overnight before planting, keep seed­
bed moist, and always use fresh seed to pre­
vent germination problems.
Parsnips are in the same family as carrots 
and are troubled by many of the same pests 
and diseases. See the Carrot entry beginning 
on page 60 for culture and information on 
problems.
Problems
Roots with dark cankers; leaves with water 
soaked or dark spots. Cause: Brown fungal 
canker. Interior of root may be discolored, 
and other diseases can enter root through 
cankers and can rot flesh. Destroy severely 
infected plants and spray remaining plants 
with copper or bordeaux mix. Prevent prob­
lems by not planting parsnips where they have 
been grown for at least 2 years, providing good 
drainage, keeping soil over shoulders of roots, 
and planting resistant cultivars such as ‘Andover 
and ‘Cobham Improved Marrow’.
Parthenocissus
Boston ivy, Virginia creeper, woodbine. Vines.
These are deciduous, alternate-leaved 
vines that climb by means of rootlike holdfasts.
Plant container-grown creepers in spring. 
A moist, loamy soil is best, in sun or shade. 
These plants are very adaptable to difficult 
conditions.
Japanese beetles can attack foliage; see 
"Leaves skeletonized” on page 236 for controls. 
For details on controlling scales, see "Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small
bumps' on page 237. Powdery mildew may 
disfigure leaves; see "Leaves with powdery 
white coating" on page 237 for controls. If 
leaf spots are a problem, see “Leaves with 
spots” on page 237.
Pea
Pisum sativum ( Leguminosae)
Peas are annual vegetables grown for their 
tasty seeds and. in some cases, seedpods. Fresh 
peas are a special treat you have to grow your­
self to enjoy.
Culture
Peas grow well in almost any soil, but do 
best in soil with lots of organic matter and a 
pH between 5.5 and 6.8. A 1" layer of compost 
worked well into the soil before planting will 
provide sufficient nutrients for a good crop.
Peas are a cool-season, moisture-loving 
crop. They grow best between 60° and 75°F 
poorly at temperatures above 75°F but will 
tolerate temperatures as low as 45°F Pea foliage 
can withstand a light frost, but pods and flow­
ers will be damaged unless they are covered.
Most disease problems in peas can be 
avoided with proper culture. Do not plant in 
wet soils. Plant in raised beds and add plenty 
of compost to loosen the soil. Rapid germina­
tion is essential to avoid root rot problems. 
Choose lighter soils for earliest plantings if 
you have a choice, and keep soil moist, but 
not wet. Avoid touching plants when they are 
wet. Dispose of vines after harvest and till soil 
to reduce future problems. Plant peas where 
no peas or beans have grown for at least 3 
years.
Soak seed in compost tea for 15 minutes 
or as long as overnight to help prevent disease 
and speed germination. Treat seed with an

162 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
inoculant labeled for garden peas before plant­
ing to promote nitrogen fixation. Be sure to 
buy fresh inoculant each year, or check the 
dale on the package for viability.
Peas are susceptible to certain micronu­
trient deficiencies. Spray young plants with 
seaweed extract every 2 weeks to help prevent 
deficiencies and boost production.
Leaf and Whole Plant Problems
Seeds do not germinate; seedlings stunted 
or dying. Causes: Seedcom maggots: damping- 
off: root rot. Seedcorn maggots are '/■»" long, 
yellow-white, spindle-shaped seed-caters. Adults 
are small flies. Seedlings that do come up are 
deformed and spindly. Remove damaged seed­
lings and plant fresh seed about a week after 
applying parasitic nematodes to the soil to 
control maggots. Seedcorn maggots thrive in 
cool, wet soil, so wait until soil is warm to 
plant to help avoid problems with them.
Damping-off is caused by soil-dwelling 
fungi that thrive in cool, wet conditions. Keep 
soil moist, but not soggy, thin seedlings to 
improve air circulation, and spray them with 
compost tea as soon as the first true leaves 
open to prevent problems.
Pea root rot can kill seedlings. Older 
infected plants are stunted and have shrunken, 
discolored roots and stems near the soil line. 
Prevent problems by planting in well-drained 
soil with lots of organic matter. Beans are 
susceptible to the same fungus, so keep the 2 
crops apart. Prevent problems by planting 
cultivars, such as Bolero' and ‘Sprite’, that are 
somewhat tolerant to pea root rot.
Seedlings clipped off at soil line. Cause: 
Cutworms. Check for fat, 1 "-2" long, dull brown 
or gray caterpillars in the soil near the base of 
plants. Sprinkle moist bran mixed with BTK 
on the soil surface in the evening, or apply 
parasitic nematodes to the soil at least a week 
before planting to control them.
Leaves yellow; growth slow. Causes:
Nitrogen deficiency; waterlogged soil. Drench 
soil and spray foliage with compost tea, fish 
emulsion, or fish-meal tea, or side-dress plants 
with compost to alleviate deficiency symptoms. 
Waterlogged soil damages roots and prevents 
them from using nutrients available in the soil. 
Prevent problems by choosing well-drained 
sites, adding organic matter to the soil to im­
prove drainage, and planting in raised beds.
Leaves yellow and distorted. Causes: Tar­
nished plant bugs; pea aphids; potato leaf­
hoppers. Tarnished plant bugs are oval, light 
green or brown, •/«" long bugs that inject a 
plant-deforming toxin as they feed on young 
leaves. Trap them with white sticky traps or 
treat plants with a commercial pyrethrin spray 
or dust in the evening to control severe 
infestations.
Pea aphids are soft-bodied, small, light to 
dark green, sucking insects usually found on 
new growth. Infested leaves are thickened and 
curled and may be covered with a sticky 
material. For light infestations, knock pests 
off plants with a blast of water. Spray plants 
with insecticidal soap in the evening to control, 
or with a commercial neem or pyrethrin spray 
if infestation is severe. Repel aphids with reflec­
tive mulch or by planting cultivars with silvery 
leaves.
Potato leafhoppers are green or brown, 
spindle-shaped, ,/iow- l/2w long, winged insects. 
Nymphs are smaller and wingless. Infested 
leaves have curled margins, and flowers or 
pods may fall off. Trap leafhoppers with yel­
low sticky traps or spray as for pea aphids 
above. Cover seedlings with row cover if leaf­
hoppers have been a problem in the past.
Leaves yellow; plant wilting and stunted. 
Cause: Fusarium wilt. Stem near soil line is 
yellow-orange to black when cut open. If pods 
form, they contain few seeds. Destroy plants 
infected with this fungal disease. To prevent 
problems, plant resistant cultivars such as 
‘Bounty*, ‘Daybreak', ‘Green Arrow*, Knight’,

PEA 
■ 
163
‘Maestro', ‘Oregon Sugar Pod 2 ',‘Snowflake, 
and ‘Sparkle’.
Leaves mottled and distorted. Cause: 
Mosaic viruses. Destroy infected plants. Con­
trol aphids and cucumber beetles that spread 
viruses, and leguminous weeds, such as vetch, 
that can harbor viruses. Prevent problems by 
planting tolerant cultivars such as ‘Knight* 
and ‘Maestro’.
Leaves stippled with white. Cause: M ites. 
Leaves become bronzed when severely infested. 
These tiny, spiderlike insects thrive in hot, dry 
weather. Look for tiny moving specks on the 
undersides of leaves. Spray plants with insec­
ticidal soap in the evening to control mites.
Leaves with water-soaked or white spots. 
Causes: Downy mildew: powdery mildew. 
Downy mildew is common in damp weather. 
Leaves and pods are covered with a thick, 
white growth that turns violet-black. Powdery 
mildew is more common in dry weather. The 
whole plant may be covered with white pow­
dery growth. Spray plants with sulfur in the 
evening, as soon as you notice either disease. 
Prevent problems by planting cultivars resis­
tant to downy mildew, such as ‘Green Arrow* 
and ‘Knight’, or to powdery mildew, such as 
‘Bounty’, ‘Knight’, ‘Maestro', ‘Oregon Sugar 
Pod 2’. and ‘Snowflake’.
Leaves with light brown to purple spots. 
Cause: Blight. Stems and pods are also spotted. 
Leaves may turn yellow and plants may die. 
Various fungi and bacteria can cause these 
disease symptoms. Spray plants with copper if 
weather is wet. Remove severely infected plants. 
Presoak seed in compost tea and don't touch 
plants when they are wet to help prevent 
problems.
Leaves with wandering, white or translu­
cent tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. Larvae are 
white maggots that tunnel through leaves. Adults 
are tiny black-and-yellow insects. Once tun­
nels appear, the larvae are inside leaves and 
spraying will not kill them. Destroy infested
leaves. Trap future generations of adults with 
yellow sticky traps, and treat plants with a 
commercial neem or pyrethrin spray if large 
numbers of adults are trapped. Prevent prob­
lems by protecting plants with row cover as 
soon as they come up to exclude egg-laying 
adults. Certain parasitic nematodes can attack 
leafminer larvae inside leaf tunnels.
Leaves with small holes. Cause: Cucum­
ber beetles. Damage usually occurs on young 
plants. Beetles are yellow or greenish, '/«” long, 
with spots or stripes. Treat plants with a com­
mercial pyrethrin spray or dust if infestation is 
severe. Cover emerging seedlings with row 
cover to prevent problems.
Leaves with large holes. Cause: Cater­
pillars. Many caterpillars feed on leaves and 
pods. Handpick. or spray plants with BTK if 
worms are feeding.
Pod Problems
Blossoms drop; no pods form. Causes: 
Weather extremes; nutrient imbalances. Exces­
sive heat or rain can cause blossoms to drop. 
Wait for new blossoms to form. Copper and/or 
molybdenum  deficiency cause the same 
symptoms. Spray plants with seaweed extract 
to help prevent deficiencies. If plants are very 
dark green and no blossoms form, suspect too 
much nitrogen. Wait for blossoms to form. 
Avoid high-nitrogen fertilizers.
Young pods distorted and withered; older 
pods with water-soaked or purplish spots. 
Cause: Blight. See “Leaves with light brown to 
purple spots ’’ above for controls.
Pods mottled, deformed, and rough. 
Cause: Mosaic viruses. See “Leaves mottled 
and distorted" above for controls.
Pods with white spots. Causes: Downy 
mildew; powdery mildew. See ‘‘Leaves with 
water-soaked or white spots’’ above for controls.
Pods with chewed holes. Cause: Cater­
pillars. Various caterpillars eat pea pods. 
Handpick, or spray plants with BTK if cater­

164 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PIANT CH IDE
pillars are feeding. Cover young plants with 
row cover to prevent moths from laying eggs.
Seeds with brown spots or cavities. Cause: 
Manganese deficiency. Spray plants with sea­
weed extract every 2 weeks to prevent 
deficiencies.
Seeds with small, round holes. Cause: 
Pea weevils. Seeds may be hollow. Fat. white, 
lt i ’ long larvae feed on seeds. Adults are 'A" 
long, dark beetles with light markings that 
may feed on pea flowers. Discard infested 
seeds; do not compost them. Cover seeded 
areas with row cover to prevent adults from 
laying eggs. Spray plants with pyrethrin if adults 
are present.
Peach
Prunus persica ( Rosaceae)
Peaches are deciduous trees growing from 
4' to 20', depending on soil, rootstock, and 
cultivar. In very early spring pink blossoms 
appear on last year’s shoots. Nectarines be­
long to the same species as peaches and have 
the same cultural requirements as well as the 
same diseases and pests. Both are hardy in 
Zones 5-9.
Culture
Plant in full sunlight in an area with well- 
drained soil and no late spring frosts. Prune 
each winter to stimulate growth, to thin next 
year’s fruit, and to allow sunlight to penetrate 
the tree. Train trees to a framework of well­
spaced, wide-angled branches. Prune bearing 
trees each winter to admit light into the tree 
and encourage good air circulation. As you 
prune, remove diseased and spindly wood and 
crossed branches. Where growth is too dense.
remove extra shoots at their bases. To develop 
growth on spindly shoots, prune off the end of 
the shoot just above an outward-facing bud. 
For more pruning information, see “Pruning 
and Training" on page 101. Thin fruit each 
spring so it has room to develop.
Like other fruit trees, peach trees need a 
period of cold weather rest or dormancy. The 
number of hours of cold between 32° and 
45°F each cultivar needs before it breaks dor­
mancy is referred to as chill hours. (Cold below 
32°F doesn't count toward meeting the dor­
mancy requirement.) Once the number is 
reached, the tree assumes winter is over and 
starts growing the next warm day. Peaches 
bloom rapidly once their requirement has been 
met, which makes them more prone to frost 
damage than other fruit trees that are slower 
to burst into bloom. Call your local extension 
service to find out how many chill hours your 
area receives and what cultivars match that 
requirement. If you choose a cultivar that 
needs fewer chill hours than you normally 
receive, an unseasonable winter thaw in your 
area may bring the tree well into flower weeks 
before spring actually arrives. But if you choose 
one that needs more chill hours than your 
climate supplies, the tree won't get enough 
chilling to stimulate normal bloom.
Most peaches are self-pollinating, but a 
few cultivars, such as ‘Indian Free’ and ‘J. H. 
Hale’, require cross-pollination. For more infor­
mation on setting fruit, see “Setting Fruit" on 
page 101.
Fruit Problems
Young fruit with crescent-shaped scars.
Cause: Plum curculios. These beetles, com­
mon east of the Rockies, leave characteristic 
scars as they lay eggs in fruit. Damaged fruit 
often drops. For control, spread a dropcloth 
under the tree and jar the trunk and branches 
with a padded mallet. Collect and destroy 
beetles that fall onto the sheet. For best results.

PEACH 
■ 
165
Adult
Larva
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
Fruit
w ith small 
brown spots 
th a t enlarge and grow 
fuzzy in humid weather.
IFCause: Brown rot. Young 
x 
twigs and leaves wilt.
R brow n. or die back.
Fruit w ith sm all, dark, 
“
 
jf sunken spots or cracks on "
skin. Cause: Bacterial leaf spot, 
leaves have dark, angular spots, 
some with holes.
Leaves puckered and
reddish. Cause: Peach
leaf curl. Leaves turn yellow and drop: fruit
is distorted and often drops prematurely.
F ruit w ith olive green 
sp o ts m ostly near stems.
Caus< Peach scab. Leaves have
small, yellowish green to black 
spots on undersides
V  wingspan
Growing sh oots w ilted 
or dying Cause: Peach twig 
borers. Look for gummy 
exudate on twigs and 
brown caterpillars 
inside tips
%  l
w
j
t
i
w
* 
1 
* *
\  
9 - 
M
Growing shoots wilted or
dying. Cause. Oriental fruit moth larvae. 
Look inside twigs for white or pink 
caterpil ars with brown heads.
Adult
wingspan
Branches wilting and 
dying; branches fall to 
leaf out In spring. Cause: 
Bacterial canker. Cankers 
ooze a sour-smelling gum.
£
Tree declines; gummy exudate 
mixed with sawdustlike material 
on trank near ground. Cause:
Peachtree borers. Burrowing larvae 
may girdle and kill tree.
Adult 
W  wingspan

166 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PIANT GUIDE
do this twice a day, beginning when you see 
the first scarred fruit. Also, to prevent curcu- 
lio eggs from hatching, collect and discard 
dropped fruit. For more information, see 
“Young fruit with crescent-shaped scars'* on 
page 186.
Fruit with small brown spots that enlarge 
and grow fuzzy in humid weather. Cause: 
Brown rot. This fungus may also cause blos­
soms to wither and die. Fruit is most infection- 
prone 3 weeks before ripening. Infected fruit 
may drop early or turn soft and brown, then 
wither into hard, black,shriveled fruit (known 
as mummies) that remains on the tree. For 
control, inspect trees before growth begins in 
the spring. Remove and destroy both mum­
mies and twigs or branches with gummy lesions. 
For more control, spray sulfur early to protect 
blooms, then again later to protect fruit. Cop­
per sprays also help. Since damaged fruit is 
more prone to infection, control insects such 
as plum curculios, which puncture fruit and 
allow infection to enter. Resistant cultivars 
include ‘Elberta*, ‘Orange Cling*, Red Bird*, 
and ‘Sunbeam*. See page 165 for an illustra­
tion of this disease.
Fruit with olive green spots mostly near 
stems. Cause: Peach scab. Spots first appear 
on immature fruit and then turn brown and 
velvety. Fruit skin cracks: fruit is distorted or 
dwarfed. Infection arises from twig lesions, 
but damp weather spreads the fungus through­
out leaves, fruit, and twigs. Infection is worst 
in warm climates and in late-fruiting cultivars. 
See page 165 for an illustration of this disease. 
To control scab, remove infected fruit and 
clean up fallen leaves and fruit. For persistent 
infection, spray lime-sulfur or sulfur only every 
10-21 days throughout the growing season. If 
spring weather is unusually warm and wet, 
spray sulfur weekly from the time flower buds 
first show green until blossoms begin to open.
Fruit with small, dark, sunken spots or 
cracks on skin. Cause: Bacterial leaf spot.
This disease, common east of the Rockies, 
spreads in the spring from oozing cankers. 
Twig cankers appear water-soaked. Leaves turn 
yellow and drop. Infection weakens trees, makes 
them prone to winter injury, and reduces fruit 
quality and yields. See page 165 for an illustra­
tion of this disease. Control with copper spray. 
Resistant cultivars include ‘Belle of Georgia*, 
‘Candor*, ‘Com-Pact Red Haven*, ‘Dixieland*, 
‘Earlired’, ‘Early-Red-Free’, ‘Harbrite’, ‘Harken’, 
‘Loring*, ‘Madison’, and ‘Red Haven’.
Fruit with sunken, corky lesions. Cause: 
Tarnished plant bugs. Bugs hibernate in nearby 
weeds and move into trees in the spring. For 
control, remove weeds and plant debris. For 
persistent infestation, hang white sticky traps 
in lower tree branches.
Fruit with pinkish worms. Cause: Ori­
ental fruit moth larvae. For more information, 
see “Growing shoots wilted or dying" below.
Leaf and Branch Problems
Growing shoots wilted or dying. Causes: 
Oriental fruit moth larvae; peach twig borers. 
Both pests tunnel into growing shoots and 
cause wilting. With oriental fruit moths, the 
tree may look unusually bushy from growth of 
new lateral shoots below wilted parts. To find 
oriental fruit moth larvae, slit stems below the 
wilted sections and look for a pinkish white 
caterpillar, up to xh" long. Later, a second 
larval generation bores into and ruins fruit. 
Controls that help keep this pest in check 
include repeated, timely sprays of BTK and 
release of the parasitic wasp Macrocentrus 
ancylivorus. Use pheromone traps to monitor 
and control the pests. Mating disruption pher­
omones, such as Isomate-M, are also effective. 
See page 165 for an illustration of an oriental 
fruit moth larva.
Wilting plus a gummy exudate from twigs 
may indicate peach twig borers. This pest also 
damages fruit. The second generation of these 
brown, W  caterpillars tunnels into fruit, usu­

PEACH ■ 167
ally near the stem. For control, find borer 
entry holes and cut off wilted branches just 
below the hole. Destroy infested prunings. 
For large branches, slide a wire into the hole 
to kill the borer. Peach twig borers prefer 
weak trees; keep trees strong through proper 
fertilization, pruning, and irrigation. See page 
165 for an illustration of this pest.
Growing shoots covered with a white pow­
dery coating. Cause; Powdery mildew. This 
disease also causes new growth to be stunted 
and distorted. Rainy weather does not cause 
the disease fungus to spread. In fact, it is most 
common in weather patterns featuring cool 
nights changing to warm days. For control, 
apply sulfur spray or lime-sulfur spray.
Young twigs and leaves wilted, brown, or 
dying back. Cause: Brown rot. Shoots and 
leaves may turn brown and decay. Gummy 
branch or twig lesions may also form. For 
more information, see “Fruit with small brown 
spots that enlarge and grow fuzzy in humid 
weather” above.
Leaves puckered and reddish. Cause: 
Peach leaf curl. Later in the season, infected 
leaves may yellow, shrivel, and drop. New growth 
is stunted and swollen and often dies. Fruit 
often drops prematurely and may have a reddish, 
irregular, rough surface. See page 165 for an 
illustration of this disease. You can’t cure this 
fungal disease during the current season, but 
copper sprays or lime-sulfur sprays help con­
trol it. Resistant cultivars include ‘Candor’, 
‘Clayton’, *Com-Pact Red Haven’, ‘Correll’, 
‘Dixieland’, ‘Elberta’, ‘Red Haven’, and ‘Stark 
EarliGlo*.
Leaves with dark, angular spots; some 
spots with holes. Cause: Bacterial leaf spot. 
Eventually, infected leaves may yellow and drop. 
For more information, see “Fruit with small, 
dark, sunken spots or cracks on skin" above.
Leaves with small purple spots, some spots 
with centers missing. Cause: Shothole disease. 
Spots also appear on fruit and then turn scabby.
Centers of leaf spots often enlarge to about 
then fall out. You can’t cure this fungus during 
the current season, but copper spray aids 
control. Keeping irrigation water away from 
foliage also helps. Dormant season pruning of 
infected buds and twigs, which have a var­
nished appearance, helps prevent the disease 
next year.
Leaves stippled yellow. Cause: European 
red mites. These extremely tiny spider mites 
suck juices from leaves, causing yellow speck­
les on foliage. For light infestations, knock 
mites off leaves with a strong spray of water; 
for heavy infestations, spray with insecticidal 
soap. Lime-sulfur spray applied early in the 
growing season also aids control. Or, to kill 
overwintering mite eggs, apply superior oil in 
the spring, just when leaf buds are about l/i" 
long. Mites are controlled by natural enemies, 
including predatory mites. If simple controls 
don’t work, purchase predatory mites (Meta- 
seiulus occidentalis) from insectaries or organic 
farm and garden supply catalogs.
Branches wilting and dying, fail to leaf out 
in spring. Causes: Bacterial canker; Valsa 
canker. Look on the branches for sunken, ellip­
tical lesions, often oozing a reddish gum. With 
bacterial canker, this gum smells sour, and 
leaves may have small, angular spots. See page 
165 for an illustration of this disease. For both 
cankers, prune wilted or dying branches off 
below the infected area. Sterilize pruning tools 
in isopropyl alcohol or a 10 percent bleach 
solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts water) between 
cuts. On large limbs, cut out the canker into 
healthy wood, which has a lighter color. Cop­
per sprays help control bacterial canker.
Valsa canker is a fungal disease that enters 
through injured bark. To prevent bark damage, 
make sure trees harden off in the fall by avoid­
ing late-season fertilization or pruning. Also 
plant in well-drained soil and paint trunks 
with white latex paint diluted with an equal 
amount of water to reduce bark-damaging

168 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
temperature fluctuations. Train trees to a good 
form with strong, wide-angled scaffold limbs. 
Also prune during bloom time, when wounds 
heal fastest. Cultivars adapted to cold climates 
or that drop leaves early are most resistant to 
Valsa canker. Choose Brighton, ‘Elberta’, 
‘Harbrite’, ‘Harken’, ‘Madison’, or Reliance’.
Whole Plant Problems
Leaves yellow; dieback of whole limbs.
Cause: Scales. Colonies of these sucking in­
sects cling to the bark and appear as small 
bumps that can be easily scraped off with a 
fingernail. Control scale by spraying trees with 
dormant oil in the winter. Also control ants, 
which encourage scale insects, by wrapping a 
strip of paper or plastic around the trunk and 
covering it with a commercial sticky coating 
such as Tanglefoot.
Tree declines; gummy exudate mixed with 
sawdustlike material on trunk near ground. 
Cause: Peachtree borers. Inspect the trunk 
near or just below the ground: you may find 
holes and a gummy exudate made by peachtree 
borers, which are the larvae of a clear-winged 
moth that bore the inner bark. See page 165 
for an illustration of this pest. Dig borers out, 
being careful to minimize tree damage, or kill 
them by inserting a wire into holes. Cultivat­
ing shallowly around the base of the tree dis­
courages these pests. Peachtree borers are 
attracted to weak trees. Keep trees vigorous 
and avoid mechanical damage. Resistant cul­
tivars include ‘Dixie Red’, ‘Elberta’, and ‘Jubilee’.
Leaves unusually small; leaves yellow or 
oddly shaped. Cause: Viral infection. A few 
viral diseases cause leaf anomalies in peach 
trees. One particular virus, known as peach 
rosette, causes trees to produce shoots that 
have abnormally short distances between the 
leaf nodes. Avoid viruses by starting with clean 
stock. Avoid planting near possible virus car­
riers, such as old peach trees or wild choke- 
cherries (Primus virginiana). Remove and 
destroy infected trees.
Pear
Pyrus communis and hybrids (Rosaceae)
Pears are deciduous, upright-growing trees 
ranging in size from about 8' to more than 30', 
depending on the cultivar and rootstock. The 
white blossoms appear in spring mostly on 
spurs—short growths that elongate less than 
an inch each year. Fruit ripens from late sum­
mer into autumn. Most gardeners are familiar 
with European pears, including the familiar 
‘Bartlett’ and ‘Bose’ pears. However, Asian 
pears, which have crisp, juicy, almost-round 
fruit, will also grow well in most parts of the 
United States and Canada. Pears are hardy in 
Zones 4-9.
Culture
Pears require full sun. They enjoy well- 
drained, moderately fertile soil, but will toler­
ate heavy or poorly drained soils more easily 
than most other fruits. Since pears flower later 
than most other common fruits, they do not 
require a site completely free of spring frost. 
Train European pears to a central leader sys­
tem and Asian pears to an open-center system. 
See the illustration on the opposite page. Prune 
bearing trees a moderate amount, enough to 
allow light into the tree and to stimulate enough 
new growth to replace old spurs or branches 
that have been removed. For more pruning 
information, see “Pruning and Training" on 
page 101. To set fruit, most pear cultivars 
require cross-pollination from a second com­
patible cultivar planted nearby. Before buying 
any cultivar, be sure you can meet the pollina­
tion requirements. For more information, see 
“Setting Fruit’’ on page 101.
Fruit Problems
Fruit with olive-brown, corky spots that 
turn dark brown. Cause: Pear scab. This fun-

PEAR 
■ 
169
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
Adult
I Nymph
toy,.
Leaves covered 
with lacy brown 
patches. Cause: 
Pear slugs. Pest 
feeds on upper 
leaf surfaces, 
leaving a network 
of veins.
W AduK
Fruit covered with a ' 
uj 
shiny, sticky coatln^<0* 
that turns black.
J Cause Pear psyllas. Pests 
suck sap, causing leaves to 
discolor and cup: sooty mold 
grows on secreted honeydew.
y Leaves suddenly blacken 
with tips of growing 
shoots bent over. Cause: 
Fire blight. Rowers, foliage, and 
eventually entire branches are 
blackened and killed.
gal disease may also cause malformed fruit. It 
overwinters on fallen leaf litter and infected 
twigs and spreads to the tree in the spring 
when warm air currents and splashing rain 
move fungal spores from the ground into the 
tree. To control pear scab, remove old leaves 
from beneath trees and compost or bury them. 
Prune out infected twigs, which bear small, 
blisterlike pustules. Do both of these chores 
in late winter or early spring before growth 
begins. Lime-sulfur applied early in the grow­
ing season also helps control the disease. Scabby 
fruit may be unattractive, but it is still edible 
once diseased portions are cut away. If scab is 
prevalent in your area, plant scab-resistant 
culti\ars. such as ‘Bartlett*.
Fruit with holes surrounded by brown, 
crumbly excrement. Cause: Codling moth 
larvae. These fat, white or pinkish. 7/s" cater­
pillars tunnel through fruit and may have
departed by the time you discover the holes, 
which may be filled with what looks like moist 
sawdust. Infested fruit may drop prematurely. 
For light infestations, kill eggs by spraying 
superior oil on leaves and twigs within 2-6 
weeks of blossoming. For heavy infestations, 
kill larvae before they tunnel into fruit by 
spraying the tree canopy with pyrethrin at 
petal fall and again 10-14 days later. Mixing 
the pyrethrin with a synergist (see “The Other 
Ingredients” on page 469) can improve control. 
For more information, see “Fruit with holes 
surrounded by brown, crumbly excrement” 
on page 22.
Fruit covered with a shiny, sticky coating 
that turns black. Cause: Pear psyllas. These 
*/.o", red to green, winged insects resemble 
cicadas. They overwinter in tree crevices and 
ground litter and emerge in early spring to lay 
eggs in trees. Newly hatched psylla nymphs

170 
■ 
PROBLEM* )I.V1NG Pi ANT (il IDE
pierce and suck juices from both foliage and 
fruit. Most regions support at least 4 genera­
tions of this pest per year, allowing plenty of 
opportunity for infestation throughout the grow­
ing season.
The sticky coating on fruit is honeydew 
excreted by the psyllas. and the black blotches 
are mold that grows on the honeydew. Fre­
quently. yellow jackets congregate around 
honeydew-coated leaves. You can clean the 
honeydew or mold off the fruit and eat it. Ex­
cessive psylla feeding will weaken the tree. 
To control psyllas, smother overwintering adults 
with dormant oil sprays applied in late winter 
before spring growth begins. During the grow­
ing season, kill eggs and mature young with 
superior oil spray or insecticidal soap.
Leaf Problems
Leaves suddenly blacken, with tips of grow­
ing shoots bent over. Cause: Fire blight. Don’t 
confuse this bacterial disease with sooty mold, 
a black fungus that rubs off easily. Fire blight 
bacteria enter the tree at the growing tips and 
may travel down toward the roots and kill the 
whole tree.
Fire blight most readily attacks very suc­
culent growth; to make trees a little more 
blight-resistant, avoid heavy pruning or nitro­
gen fertilizer, both of which induce vigorous 
growth. When pruning, thin out whole branches 
rather than heading them back. This pruning 
strategy reduces the total number of cuts and 
won’t stimulate the growth of soft, blight- 
susceptible, sideshoots. To prevent rampant 
growth on mature trees, grow grass right up to 
the trunk; if needed, allow the grass to grow 
longer than normal.
Control fire blight during the growing 
season by pruning off branches a foot below 
infected sections. Between each cut, dip prun­
ing shears into isopropyl alcohol or a 10 per­
cent bleach solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts 
water) to prevent spreading the disease as you 
prune. As the growing season progresses, fire
blight bacteria grow within blighted shoots 
down branches and toward the roots. During 
the fall, the bacteria form a sunken, dark can­
ker in which to overwinter. Over the winter, 
inspect branches for these cankers and prune 
off damaged branches at least 6" below the 
cankers.
One way to prevent fire blight from kill­
ing an entire tree is to purchase trees in which 
a blight-susceptible cultivar has been grafted 
onto blight-resistant framework. Good root­
stocks include the ‘Old Home’ X  ‘Farmingdale’ 
series, Pyrus belulifolia. and P caller)’ana. 
Copper sprays applied in spring may also reduce 
the incidence of fire blight, but spraying alone 
will not control the disease. Cultivars fairly 
resistant to fire blight include Duchess’, ‘Gar­
ber’, Moonglow’, ‘O rient’, ‘Seckel’, ‘Seuri’, 
‘Shinko’, ‘Starking Delicious, and ‘Yali’.
Leaves suddenly blacken in autumn. 
Cause: Pseudomonas blight. You might mis­
take this disease for fire blight, but fire blight 
symptoms appear in warm spring weather, 
and its cankers ooze in the spring. Pseudomo­
nas blight first appears during cool fall weather 
and its cankers do not ooze in the spring. 
Control it by pruning, as for fire blight (see 
“Leaves suddenly blacken, with tips of growing 
shoots bent over” above).
Leaves with small, round, dark spots hav­
ing purple margins. Cause: Fabraea leaf spot. 
This disease, most common east of the Missis­
sippi River, may cause leaves to turn yellow 
and drop, weakening the tree. Since the dis­
ease overwinters in twig cankers as well as 
fallen leaves, garden sanitation does little to 
control the disease. Copper spray, applied when 
leaves are half out and then once or twice 
again at 2-week intervals, offers some control.
Leaves with dark, velvety patches. Cause: 
Pear scab. The spots are mostly on leaf 
undersides, and infected leaves often pucker 
and drop. For more information, see “Fruit 
with olive-brown, corky spots that turn dark 
brown” on page 168.

PECAN 
■ 
171
Leaves covered with lacy brown patches.
Cause: Pear slugs. These green-black, slimy 
creatures are not true slugs; they’re the larvae 
of the pear sawfly, a black-and-yellow insect 
slightly larger than a housefly. In the spring, 
sawflies emerge from soilborne cocoons and 
lay eggs on leaves. Eggs hatch into sluglike 
larvae that skeletonize leaves. Remove them 
by handpicking or with blasts of water. For 
heavy infestations, use insecticidal soap spray; 
on a dwarf tree, apply wood ashes or diatoma- 
ceous earth. (Caution: Wood ashes may dam­
age leaf tissue.) Spider mites multiply quickly 
in dry, dusty conditions, so wash ashes off 
after a few days to avoid encouraging a rise in 
spider mite population.
Leaves with small brown blisters on un­
dersides. Cause: Pearleaf blister mites. Inside 
these blisters are small, elongated, white mites 
that you need a magnifying glass to see. Dam­
age usually is cosmetic and can be ignored, 
but if control is necessary, spray lime-sulfur 
before buds open or superior oil as buds swell. 
Be sure to spray oil thoroughly to kill adults 
hiding in bud scales.
Leaves turn yellow; limbs die back. Cause: 
San Jose scale. If limb dieback is preceded by 
extensive leaf yellowing, look for the small 
gray bumps of San Jose scale clinging to the 
bark. Colonies of these sucking, nearly immo­
bile insects cling to bark and weaken trees by 
sucking sap. Control scale with dormant oil 
spray applied in late winter.
Pecan
Carya illinoinensis (juglandaceae)
Pecans are large, deciduous trees with 
separate male and female flowers borne on 
the same plant. These plants are hardy in
Zones 6-9. Trees grown at the northern hardi­
ness limit may not have a long enough season 
to ripen nuts.
Plant pecans in deep, well-drained soil in 
full sun. Trees need almost no pruning. Since 
male and female flowers on a given tree often 
mature at different times, plant 2 different 
cultivars to ensure pollination.
Problems
Nuts contain insect larvae. Causes: 
Pecan weevil grubs; hickory shuckworms; pecan 
nut casebearer larvae. Pecan weevils, snouted 
beetles similar to plum curculios. lay eggs 
within newly formed nut kernels; larvae that 
hatch from these eggs feed on the nut and 
emerge several weeks later through tiny holes 
in the shell and husk. Infested nuts are worth­
less and generally cling to the tree instead of 
splitting normally from the hulls. To control 
this pest, place dropcloths beneath the tree 
and jar the limbs with padded poles. Collect 
and destroy the fallen adults. Do this every 2 
weeks beginning in midsummer until weevils 
no longer drop.
You will find cream-colored, V#" hickory 
shuckworms eating the kernels of immature 
nuts that drop early as a result of the infestation. 
These pests are the larvae of gray moths, and 
the final larval generation overwinters on the 
ground in dropped shucks. To control shuck­
worms. keep dropped hulls picked up or bury 
them at the end of the season.
Pecan nut casebearers, xh '\ green larvae 
of a gray moth, spin webs around nuts and 
then enter to feed. Infested nuts may drop 
prem aturely. O verw intering larvae leave 
cocoons in early spring and bore into growing 
shoots, causing wilting. Damage is worst early 
in the season. To help control casebearers, 
pick up and destroy all dropped infested nuts. 
The parasitic wasp Trichogramma minutiim 
attacks and parasitizes casebearer eggs. For 
heavyr infestations of casebearers, release 5,000 
of these wasps per infested tree.

172 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PIANT GL IDE
Leaves with olive-brown spots on under­
sides; shucks with small, velvety, olive-brown 
spots. Cause: Pecan scab. Leaf spots may 
enlarge to large black areas. The spots on the 
shucks may spread into large, sunken, black 
lesions. Nuts may drop prematurely. This fun­
gal disease is worst in humid areas and over­
winters on infected twigs, shucks, and leaves. 
To reduce infection the following season, clean 
up plant debris in autumn and knock off old 
leaf stems and shucks before trees leaf out in 
the spring. Scab-resistant cultivars include ‘Cape 
Fear, ‘Chocktaw\ ‘C urtis, ‘Desirable, ‘Glo­
ria Grande’, and ‘Stuart’.
Tree declines; leaves yellow, die, but remain 
on tree. Cause: Cotton root rot. Roots of 
infected trees are brownish, rotted, and soft. 
Cotton root rot fungus lives in the soil for 5 
years or more, thriving especially in areas 
with heavy, moist, alkaline soil. An acid-type 
fertilizer might help mildly affected trees, 
but dig up dying trees and do not replant 
with pecans.
Pelargonium
Pelargonium, geranium. 
Tender perennials grown as annuals.
Pelargoniums, commonly known as ger­
aniums. are easy-to-grow plants that are popu­
lar with both beginner and advanced gardeners. 
Most gardeners grow flowering geraniums for 
the clusters of red, pink, lilac, salmon, or 
white flowers that appear all season over 1 '-3r 
plants. Other geraniums are grown primarily 
for their fragrant leaves, which release power­
ful scents when brushed. Geraniums can also 
have attractively shaped and variegated foliage, 
with up to 4 colors in just 1 leaf. In mild
climates geraniums persist throughout the year. 
They are delightful in beds, borders, pots, and 
hanging baskets.
Buy new nursery-grown plants each year, 
or start your own from seed. You can direct- 
seed outdoors in late spring, although indoor 
seeding in late winter or early spring gets 
better results. Good window or artificial light 
is needed indoors. Cover seeds lightly. Germi­
nation is erratic within 3-8 weeks. When seed­
lings have 2-3 true leaves, transplant them to 
individual 3" pots. After the last frost, plant 
outdoors 10" apart.
Geraniums usually need full sun. In the 
Deep South, give them light shade, or plants 
may burn. Soil should be well-drained, medium 
rich, and slightly acid; if it is alkaline, add 
peat moss to planting area. Water regularly, 
letting the soil dry out slightly between water­
ings. Fertilize regularly but lightly; overfeed­
ing results in large leaves and fewer flowers. 
Remove spent flower heads to prolong bloom­
ing. Pinching back growing tips in early stages 
promotes fullness. Cut the plant back if it 
becomes leggy.
Problems
Leaves yellow; plant weakened. Cause: 
Whiteflies. For controls, see ‘‘Leaves yellow; 
plant weakened” on page 18.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. For control measures, 
see “Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage 
webbed” on page 18.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves, stems, and buds distorted” 
on page 20 for controls.
Stems with rotted sections; leaves wilt. 
Cause: Stem rot. This fungal disease starts at 
the base of plants and works upward. It com­
monly affects cuttings, but can also injure 
full-grown plants. Stems often turn black. Only 
take cuttings from healthy plants, and stick

PEPPER 
■ 
173
them in a sterile medium. Remove and destroy 
affected parts or plants.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots*’ on page 19 for con­
trol information.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. See "Leaves with large, rag­
ged holes’* on page 18 for controls.
Pepper
Capsicum annuum var. antiuum (Solanaceae)
Peppers are tender perennials that are 
grown as annuals in temperate climates for 
their sweet to fiery hot fruit. Pick peppers 
when they are unripe and green (or some­
times yellow or purple-black) or after they 
ripen to red, orange, yellow, or brown, depend­
ing on the cultivar. In general, ripe peppers 
are sweeter or less hot than unripe ones of the 
same cultivar.
Culture
Peppers require deeply worked, well- 
drained soil with lots of organic matter. They 
do best at a pH between 6.0 and 6.8, but 
tolerate pH as low as 5.5. Peppers require a 
moderate to high level of nitrogen and moder­
ate levels of phosphorus, potassium , and 
calcium. Have the soil tested and amend as 
needed before planting. Peppers grow best 
between 65° and 80°E Temperatures above 
85° or below 60°F can cause blossoms to 
drop without setting fruit.
Peppers tolerate drought, but do best in 
soil that is evenly moist, but not soggy. Plant 
in raised beds to improve drainage, if needed. 
Stake peppers to keep fruit from touching the 
ground and use mulch to control weeds and
prevent soilborne diseases from splashing up 
on the fruit.
Do not plant peppers where tomatoes, 
potatoes, eggplants, or peppers have been 
planted within the past 3-5 years. Also, try to 
plan your planting scheme to separate these 
crops in the garden. Compost or till under all 
plant residues at the end of the season, and till 
the soil to reduce overwintering pests.
Purchase sturdy, insect- and disease-free 
plants, or start your own from seed indoors. 
Soak seed in a 10 percent bleach solution (1 
part bleach to 9 parts water) for 10 minutes, 
and rinse in clean water before planting to 
reduce seed-borne diseases. Pepper seeds ger­
minate best above 80°E Once seedlings are 
up. they grow best at 70°F during the day and 
60°F during the night. Wait until soil temper­
atures reach 65°F before setting out transplants. 
Spray transplants with an antitranspirant to 
help reduce disease problems, and water them 
with seaweed extract or compost tea to give 
them a good start. To improve fruit set, spray 
plants with seaweed extract with 1 teaspoon 
of Epsom salts added to 1 gallon when the 
first flowers open.
Leaf and Whole Plant Problems
Seedlings fall over; stems girdled or rot­
ted at soil line. Cause: Damping-off. Disin­
fect reused pots and flats by dipping them in a 
10 percent bleach solution and letting them 
air-dry before filling them with fresh seed- 
starting mix. Sow seeds thinly to allow for air 
movement around seedlings. Cover seed with 
a thin layer of soilless mix or vermiculite. Water 
only enough to keep soil moist, not soggy. 
Thin seedlings and spray with compost tea as 
soon as first true leaves open to help prevent 
the problem.
Seedlings clipped off at soil line. Cause: 
Cutworms. Check for fat. 1 "-2" long, dull brown 
or gray caterpillars in the soil near the base of 
plants. Once they chew off a seedling, there is

174 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PIANT GUIDE
nothing you can do except protect the remain­
ing seedlings from nocturnal cutworm attacks. 
Place cutworm collars around transplants, sprin­
kle moist bran mixed with BTK on the soil 
surface in the evening, or add parasitic nema­
todes to the soil at least a week before plant­
ing to control them.
Leaves pale green and small. Cause: Nitro­
gen deficiency. Spray plants and drench roots 
with fish emulsion to alleviate symptoms, and 
side-dress with compost.
Leaves yellow, distorted, and sticky. 
Cause: Aphids. These small green, pink, black, 
gray, or white fluffy-coated insects suck plant 
sap. For mild infestations, knock pests off 
plants with a blast of water. Spray plants with 
insecticidal soap in the evening to control, or 
with a commercial neem or pyrethrin spray if 
infestation is severe.
Leaves mottled with yellow; young growth 
malformed. Causes: Tobacco mosaic virus: 
other viral diseases. Destroy diseased plants. 
Presoak seed in a 10 percent bleach solution 
before planting, or choose resistant cultivars 
to prevent problems. Wash hands after hand­
ling tobacco and before touching peppers to 
prevent tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). Con­
trol aphids, because they spread viral diseases 
as they feed. Prevent problems by planting 
resistant cultivars such as “A ce\ Beli Captain, 
Beli Tower*. 'Early Wonder*. ‘Elisa*, ‘Galaxy’, 
Goldcrest*, Gypsy*. ‘Lady Beli’, ‘Lasto*, 
“Northstar*. ‘Orobelle’, and Yolo Wonder*.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted and wilts in 
hot weather. Cause: Nematodes. Plants even­
tually die. Roots may have swollen galls. Destroy 
infested plants, do not compost them. To con­
trol these pests, apply chitin or parasitic nem­
atodes to the soil.
Older leaves yellow; shoots or whole plant 
wilts. Cause: Fusarium or Verticillium wilt. 
Fusarium wilt and Verticillium wilt are both 
fungal diseases and are difficult to tell apart. 
Both Fusarium and Verticillium wilt begin as 
a yellowing and wilting of the lower leaves.
Plants are stunted and do not recover when 
watered. Cut open a stem near the soil line 
and look for internal discoloration. Verticil­
lium fungi are active between 68° and 75°F, 
while Fusarium is active between 80° and 
90°F Destroy infected plants. Pepper Fusarium 
infects only peppers, while Verticillium infects 
a wide range of plant species, making effec­
tive rotation control difficult. Prevent prob­
lems by presoaking seed in a 10 percent bleach 
solution. Control pest nematodes to help reduce 
wilt problems. Few wilt-resistant cultivars are 
available: ‘G iant Szegedi* is tolerant of 
Verticillium.
Leaves stippled yellow, or bronzed. Cause : 
Mites. Leaves turn dry and papery. These tiny, 
spiderlike insects thrive in hot, dry weather. 
Spray plants with insecticidal soap if popula­
tions are high (more than 1-2 pests per leaf).
Leaves with small, sunken, yellow-green 
spots. Cause: Bacterial spot. Spots eventu­
ally turn brown with lighter centers. Spray 
plants with copper as soon as symptoms appear 
to prevent further symptom development. Pre­
soak seed in a 10 percent bleach solution to 
disinfect, and avoid touching wet plants.
Leaves with gray-brown spots. Cause: 
Cercospora leaf spot. This fungal disease only 
occurs in very warm climates. Spots develop a 
“frog-eye” appearance with light centers and 
dark edges. Spray plants with copper as soon 
as symptoms appear to prevent further symp­
tom development. Presoak seed in a 10 per­
cent bleach solution and plant resistant 
cultivars, such as California Wonder', to pre­
vent problems.
leaves with wandering, white or translu­
cent tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. W hite, 
maggotlike larvae feed inside leaves, leaving 
empty tunnels behind them. Once larvae have 
entered leaves, spraying will not control them. 
Destroy mined leaves. Cover plants with row 
cover until flowers open to prevent adults from 
laying eggs on plants. Certain nematodes can 
attack leafminer larvae inside leaf tunnels.

PEPPER 
■ 
175
Leaves with small holes. Cause: Flea 
beetles. Young transplants are the most 
susceptible. These tiny, black, brown, or bronze 
insects hop when disturbed. Spray or dust 
plants with pyrethrin if infestation is severe. 
Protect transplants with row cover until they 
start to flower.
Leaves with large holes. Causes: Horn- 
worms; other caterpillars. Hornworms are 
3 "_4 ,/2" caterpillars with white diagonal stripes. 
The tobacco homworm has a red horn pro­
jecting from the rear, while the tomato horn- 
worm has a black horn. Handpick or spray 
plants with BTK to control them. Do not 
spray caterpillars that are covered with small 
white cocoons; these cases contain the larvae 
of parasitic wasps that are natural hornworm 
predators.
Other caterpillars such as European com 
borers and corn earworms sometimes feed on 
pepper leaves and fruit. Handpick. or spray 
plants with BTK if many caterpillars are feeding.
Flower and Fruit Problems
Few flowers form; flowers may drop with­
out setting fruit. Causes: Excess nitrogen; 
extreme temperatures; pepper weevils. Plants 
with excess nitrogen are dark green and 
vigorous, but produce few flowers. Wait for 
flowers to form. Prevent problems by avoiding 
high-nitrogen soil amendments.
Temperatures over 85° or below 60°F 
can damage flowers and cause them to fall 
without setting fruit. Wait for new flowers to 
form. Protect plants with row cover until night 
temperatures remain above 60°F
Check flowers for pepper weevils, which 
are 
reddish brown to black insects. These 
pests may also cause misshapen and discol­
ored fruit. Destroy infested fruit; dust with 
pyrethrin as a last resort.
Fruit misshapen. Causes: Extreme tem­
peratures; pepper maggots; viral diseases. Tem­
peratures over 85° or below 60°F can damage 
flowers and prevent complete pollination.
Resulting fruit is lopsided and deformed, but 
ripens evenly.
Pepper maggots are white with pale heads 
and grow up to lA" long. Adults are small 
yellow-and-brown flies. Ripening fruit is blotchy. 
Destroy infested fruit. Spray plants with pyre­
thrin when they begin to set fruit, and repeat 
if damage occurs if you have had severe prob­
lems in the past.
If ripening fruit is blotchy but no maggot 
feeding is found, the plants may have a virus. 
See “Leaves mottled with yellow; young growth 
malformed” above for controls.
Fruit with green to dark brown, raised, 
wartlike spots. Cause: Bacterial spot. Spots 
can provide entry for more destructive rot 
fungi in wet weather. Spotted fruit is edible if 
not rotted. See “Leaves with small, sunken, 
yellow-green spots” above for controls.
Fruit with small, rotten spots or shallow 
depressions. Cause: Pepper maggots. See 
“Fruit misshapen” above for description and 
controls.
Fruit with faded or gray-white, sunken 
patches or pits. Causes: Sunscald; cold injury. 
Green or ripe fruit can be sunscalded. Dam­
age shows up as a large, sunken patch on the 
exposed side. Patches turn dry and may develop 
black mold. Control leaf diseases to prevent 
defoliation, so fruit will be shaded and pro­
tected from direct sun. Stake plants.
Pepper fruits are damaged by tempera­
tures below 37°F and develop small, sunken 
pits or large, discolored areas. Cover plants 
with row cover if temperatures near freezing 
are predicted.
Fruit with water-soaked, sunken areas at 
the blossom end. Cause: Blossom end rot. 
Seen on green or ripe fruit. Affected area 
becomes dark and shriveled. This condition is 
caused by calcium deficiency in the fruit. It is 
aggravated by drought or uneven soil moisture, 
root damage, high salt levels in the soil, and 
excess nitrogen. If soil test indicates deficiency, 
add high-calcium lime to the soil. Prevent

176 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GLIDE
problems by keeping soil evenly moist and by 
spraying plants with seaweed extract when 
the first flowers open and again when green 
fruit is visible.
Fruit with water-soaked areas near stem; 
entire fruit collapses into a slimy mess. Cause: 
Bacterial soft rot. Pick fruit as soon as water- 
soaked areas appear, and discard soft portions. 
Destroy rotted fruit. Prevent problems by con­
trolling insect damage, staking and spacing 
plants so they dry out rapidly, and mulching to 
prevent soilborne bacteria from splashing up 
on plants during watering. Spray fruiting plants 
with copper if the weather is wet and you have 
had severe problems in the past.
Fruit with concentrically ringed, sunken 
spots. Cause: Anthracnose. Spots appear on 
green or ripe fruit. Destroy infected fruit. Spray 
fruit with copper when they are almost full-size 
and begin to feel solid if you have had problems 
in the past. Presoak seed in a 10 percent bleach 
solution to prevent seed-borne disease.
Fruit colors prematurely; small holes and 
sawdustlike material visible near stems. Causes: 
European corn borers: com  earworms. Once 
caterpillars are feeding in fruit, it is too late to 
control them by spraying. Pick and use or 
destroy infested fruit. Both of these pests feed 
on leaves for a few days before they enter fruit, 
so reduce damage by spraying plants with 
BTK if caterpillars are feeding on leaves. Pre­
vent adults from laying eggs on plants by cov­
ering them with row cover.
Perennials
Pests and diseases that trouble ornamen­
tal perennial plants may warrant different treat­
ment than those same problems appearing on 
annuals. Perennials are plants you hope to
have around for a long time, so eliminating 
hungry insects and disfiguring diseases becomes 
more important. With few exceptions, the pests 
and diseases that plague perennials are best 
controlled through good site selection and 
cultural practices, as described in the individ­
ual plant entries.
The symptoms listed below represent dam­
age caused by pests and diseases that attack a 
wide variety of herbaceous perennials. Con­
trols for these problems do not vary signifi­
cantly among plant species.
Problems
Leaves and/or flowers with holes. Causes: 
Japanese beetles; other leaf-eating beetles. 
Perennial beds attract a number of hungry 
beetles, including 3A" black blister beetles, 
*/»o" flea beetles, '/j", reddish brown rose chafers, 
and nocturnal, 'A", gray Fuller rose beetles. 
Iridescent blue-green with bronze wing covers, 
•A" Japanese beetles top this list of trouble­
some pests; the adults devour the leaves, stalks, 
and flowers of nearly 300 plant species, while 
the 3A", C-shaped grub larvae feed on roots 
and are a major pest of lawn grasses.
Injury caused by adult beetles ranges from 
small holes in leaves to skeletonized foliage to 
complete defoliation. Feeding by weevils, such 
as long-nosed Fuller rose beetles, resembles 
“ticket punches" around leaf margins. Japan­
ese beetles are fond of flowers and often do 
most of their damage there. Most beetles are 
active during the day and are large enough to 
be readily visible while they feed. Weevils 
more often prefer night-time feeding; a flash­
light reveals their activity.
Handpick adult beetles into a can of soapy 
water or a 5 percent solution of isopropyl 
alcohol. Wear gloves if your pests are blister 
beetles; contact with crushed beetles can cause 
bums and blisters on skin. Shake infested plants 
in early morning to knock beetles onto a 
dropcloth, then scoop them up and destroy.

PERENNIALS 
■ 
177
Coordinate a community effort to set up Jap­
anese beetle traps over a large area; otherwise, 
traps will just attract these pests to your yard. 
Treat lawns with milky disease spores to con­
trol beetle larvae. Apply parasitic nematodes 
to the soil to limit all beetle grub populations. 
As a last resort, spray infested plants with 
neem or pyrethrin.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. Differing only in the pres­
ence or absence of a shell, slugs and snails 
range in size from 'A" to 8" and may be gray, 
tan, green, black, yellow, or spotted. The cool, 
moist soil conditions favored by many perennials 
make plantings appealing to these busy 
mollusks. Mulch and plants with low-growing 
leaves provide shady hiding places from which 
they emerge to feed nocturnally. All species 
rasp large holes in leaves, stems, and bulbs: 
slimy trails of mucus also signal their presence.
Since slugs and snails travel on a flat, 
muscular foot, you can impede their progress 
with barriers of materials that irritate their 
soft bodies. Push 4"-8" copper strips into the 
soil around beds as edging. Sprinkle bands of 
coarse, dry, scratchy materials such as cinders, 
wood ashes, cedar sawdust, and diatomaceous 
earth around plants or beds: renew frequently. 
Lay boards, cabbage leaves, or overturned 
clay pots—anything that offers a cool, damp 
daytime haven —around the garden; destroy 
pests that congregate underneath. Handpick 
slugs and snails from plants at night: kill the 
pests by dropping them into soapy water or 
sprinkling them with table salt. Set shallow 
pans into the soil, placing the lip flush with 
the soil surface, and fill with stale beer or any 
fermenting liquid: remove drowned pests daily. 
Encourage predatory ground beetles by main­
taining clover, sod. or stone walkways.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted, sticky; 
clusters of small insects. Cause: Aphids. Sev­
eral species of pear-shaped, 
aphids
plague perennials. Aphids can be green, pink.
black, gray, or with a white fluffy coating and 
have long antennae and 2 short tubes project­
ing from the rear of their abdomens. These 
pests cluster under leaves and on growing tips. 
Aphids suck plant sap, causing leaf and bud 
distortion and blossom and leaf drop. Their 
feeding may spread diseases such as aster 
yellows. As they feed, they excrete sticky hon­
eydew on which sooty mold grows; see “Leaves 
with black coating" below for more information.
Wash aphids from plants with a strong 
spray of water; repeat as needed to control 
infestations. Encourage natural predators and 
parasites such as aphid midges, assassin bugs, 
lacewings, lady beetles, and spiders. Apply 
homemade garlic or tomato-leaf sprays. If water 
sprays fail, try sprays of alcohol, citrus oil, 
insecticidal soap, or neem. Use boric acid 
bait to control ants that herd aphids onto 
plants. As a last resort, spray seriously infested 
plants with pyrethrin.
Leaves with black coating. Cause: Sooty 
mold. This fungus grows on the sugary', sticky 
honeydew produced by aphids and other suck- 
ing pests such as scales, whiteflies. and 
mealybugs. The black fungal coating doesn’t 
harm leaves directly, but it does shade the 
leaves and reduce growth. The best control is 
to deal with the pests that are producing the 
honeydew. Identify the pest and apply the 
appropriate control. (If the plant itself doesn't 
show signs of pest damage, the honeydew 
may be dripping down from an overhanging 
plant.) On small plants, wipe the leaves with a 
damp cloth to remove the honeydew and the 
sooty mold.
Leaves covered with white powder. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. Powdery white or grayish 
fungal patches grow on upper leaf surfaces of 
plants subject to poor air circulation or hot, 
humid weather. As the disease spreads, leaves 
become distorted and may drop off. Powdery 
mildew is more severe when growing condi­
tions are unsatisfactory.

178 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GLIDE
To prevent powdery mildew, spray with 
sulfur fungicide approximately every 10 days 
during warm, wet weather. If infection occurs, 
remove and destroy infected leaves. Water 
early in the day so foliage dries before nightfall. 
Avoid wetting leaves when watering. Thin plants 
to improve air movement. Avoid ongoing prob­
lems by cleaning up debris in the fall and 
destroying severely infected plants. To protect 
plants, spray with antitranspirants, baking soda 
solution, a commercial fungicidal soap, garlic, 
copper, or sulfur.
Buds and leaves deformed or dwarfed. 
Cause: True bugs. Several of the generally 
shield-shaped true bugs (order Hemiptera), 
including tarnished plant bugs, four-lined plant 
bugs, lace bugs, and lygus bugs, feed on 
perennials. While many species of true bugs 
are beneficial insects, the pests in this group 
pierce plant tissue to drink sap, injecting tox­
ins that deform plant tissues. In addition to 
dwarfing and deforming plants, feeding by 
true bugs causes sunken, rounded, tan to dark 
brown spots on foliage. As leaves grow, the 
dead areas tear into small holes.
Many of these pests overwinter in garden 
refuse: remove weeds and debris from area in 
spring and fall. Plant groundcovers and pollen 
plants to encourage populations of predatory 
insects. Handpick pests and drop them into a 
jar of soapy water. Spray every 3-5 days with 
insecticidal soap, making sure to treat the 
undersides of leaves, for 2 weeks. Treat severe 
infestations with pyrethrin.
Seedlings or young plants cut off at soil 
level. Cause: Cutworms. The fat, gray or dull 
brown, 1" caterpillars of P/2" brown or gray 
moths, cutworms feed on stems at night, cut­
ting off transplants and sometimes eating entire 
seedlings. Severed plants are found lying on 
the ground the next morning. Some species 
climb plant stems, cutting off leaves and 
sideshoots as they feed. Most active in May 
and June, cutworms can destroy several plants 
each night. These caterpillars remain below
the soil surface during the day.
Protect plants by placing a collar, such as 
a toilet paper roll or an open-ended can, around 
each young plant. Make each collar 2"-3" 
wide and 1 Vi"-!” in diameter; push them into 
the soil so that about half the collar is below 
the soil surface. To kill some larvae, scatter 
moist bran mixed with molasses and BTK 
over soil in the evening a week before planting. 
Also, apply parasitic nematodes to the soil to 
reduce future populations.
Petunia
Petunia. Annuals.
Showy petunias are popular in bedding 
schemes all over the country. Single or double, 
plain or ruffled, trumpet-shaped flowers bloom 
all summer on 8 "-18" plants. Flower colors 
include lavender, yellow, red, pink, purple, 
and white, alone or in combinations. Plant in 
masses for eye-catching effect in beds, borders, 
containers, or hanging baskets.
Sow seed indoors 9 weeks before the last 
frost. Do not cover the extremely tiny seeds. 
Transplant carefully outdoors when frost dan­
ger passes. Many gardeners prefer to buy bed­
ding plants. Get sturdy young plants, not leggy 
ones that won't grow well.
Single-flowered cultivars do well in aver­
age soil and are hardier in general; fancy ruf­
fled types grow best in richer soil. Petunias 
need sunshine at least half the day, and prefer 
more. Water frequently during hot weather. 
Monthly light feedings encourage bigger and 
better flowers; overfertilization gives stem and 
leaf growth rather than blooms. In midsum­
mer plants may begin looking straggly. Cut 
back to 6" high, fertilize, and give a good 
soaking to revitalize.

PHLOX 
■ 
179
Problems
Flowers with gray or brown spots; leaves 
with brown spots. Cause: Botrytis blight. This 
fungus is a real problem in humid climates. As 
the fungus spreads, the spots may become 
fuzzy with mold. The initial attack is on weak 
plants but spreads to healthy ones on contact, 
or by wind, rain, or handling. Remove infected 
flowers and leaves. Thin plantings to improve 
air circulation. Use drip irrigation rather than 
overhead watering. Look for Botrytis-resistant 
cultivars.
Leaves mottled and crinkled. Cause: Viral 
diseases. Several viruses can attack petunias. 
They are spread by contact or by insects, such 
as aphids and leafhoppers. Remove and destroy 
infected plants. Wash your gardening tools 
and hands after touching infected plants. Also, 
don't smoke in the garden, to avoid introduc­
ing viruses from the tobacco.
Leaves and/or flowers with round or irreg­
ular holes. Causes: Caterpillars; beetles; slugs 
and snails. Both moth and butterfly caterpil­
lars feed on petunia leaves and buds. Handpick, 
or spray with BTK on appearance. Many types 
of beetles, including flea beetles, Japanese 
beetles, Colorado potato beetles, and cucum­
ber beetles, feed on petunias. Handpick larger 
beetles. For serious infestations, apply pyre­
thrin in early morning. Slugs and snails like 
petunias, too. For control information, see 
“Leaves with large, ragged holes” on page 18.
Philadelphia
Mock orange. Shrubs.
Mock oranges are deciduous shrubs, grown 
primarily for their white, late-spring flowers. 
They are useful in shrub borders.
Set out in fall or spring in full sun or light 
shade. While they can adapt to varying soil 
conditions, mock oranges prefer a moist but 
well-drained site rich in organic matter.
Mock oranges are remarkably free of seri­
ous problems. Aphids sometimes infest the 
leaves; see “Leaves wrinkled and discolored" 
on page 235 for controls. Leafminer larvae 
make curved mines in the leaves; see “Leaves 
tunneled" on page 237. Plants crowded together 
are susceptible to powdery mildew; for controls, 
see “Leaves with powdery white coating" on 
page 237.
Phlox
Phlox. Perennials.
Showy, long-flowering plants that produce 
clusters of trumpet-shaped blooms in many 
colors, phlox range from tall, upright plants to 
low. trailing ones. Bountiful flowers of white, 
purple, pink, and blue—often with contrast­
ing centers—cover the various species: Gar­
den phlox (Phlox paniculata) grows 3'-4' tall 
and blooms mid- to late summer; creeping 
phlox (P stolonifera) is a 9'-12" spring bloomer; 
5"-6" tall moss pink (P subulata) flowers in 
early spring. Lance-shaped, 3" long, light green 
leaves are typical of most phlox, although 
moss pink's fine, semi-evergreen foliage is 
needlelike.
In general, plant upright phlox in full sun 
and give trailing species partial shade. Gar­
den phlox tolerates light shade, but weaker 
plants result. Moist, well-drained, and richly 
organic soils are favored by all phlox; add 
compost to soil at planting. Choose sites with 
good air movement to limit diseases; taller 
phlox need shelter from wind and may require 
staking. Phlox do not endure drought well;

180 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
give V2" - r  of water weekly, applying it at soil 
level to avoid wetting leaves. Mulch to retain 
moisture in summer.
Remove spent flowers to prolong bloom­
ing and reduce seed set. Seedlings gradually 
take over garden phlox plantings if plants are 
allowed to self-sow: flower color and plant 
size may change dramatically over time, as 
seedlings are not true to parents. Shear low- 
growing moss pink back by half to encourage 
bushy growth. Divide as necessary to improve 
air circulation and reduce clumps.
The severity of pest and disease attacks 
varies among phlox species; most are durable 
plants that easily withstand problems. Gar­
den phlox, however, is injured by a number of 
pest and disease organisms, as described below.
Problems
Buds and leaves deformed or dwarfed.
Cause: Phlox plant bugs. See “Buds and leaves 
deformed or dwarfed" on page 178.
Leaves covered with white powder. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. See “Leaves covered with 
white powder" on page 177 for controls.
Leaves deformed; stems swollen or de­
formed; plant stunted. Cause: Bulb and stem 
nematodes. Plants infested with these tiny 
roundworms have crinkled, thin, or thread­
like leaves, distorted shoot tips, and swollen 
stems. Stunted plants fail to flower and may 
die. Nematodes travel over wet plants on a 
film of water or on garden tools and gardeners 
moving among plants. There is no cure for 
infested plants; remove and destroy them. Do 
not grow phlox in sites where nematodes are 
present. Remove debris from gardens in fall to 
control pest populations.
Leaves stippled, reddish to yellow, with 
fine webbing. Cause: Spider mites. These ’/so" 
pests feed on the undersides of foliage, caus­
ing it to yellow, dry up. and die; excessive 
feeding turns foliage almost white, and fine 
webs appear on leaves. Mites seek out water-
stressed plants in hot, dry weather; adequate 
watering guards against these pests. While 
spraying plants daily with a strong stream of 
water often gives control, this practice pro­
motes fungal leaf disorders in phlox. Intro­
duce predatory mites to the garden (1,000 per 
500 square feet). Spray severe cases with 
avermectins, citrus oils, insecticidal soap, neem, 
or pyrethrin.
Leaves with brown spots. Cause: Fungal 
diseases. Several fungi cause leaf spots that 
enlarge, run together, and form blotches. Don’t 
overcrowd plants; avoid working with phlox 
when leaves are wet; remove and destroy 
infected plant parts and severely infected plants. 
If leaf spots are a regular problem, spray with 
sulfur or bordeaux mix.
Picea
Spruce. Trees.
Spruces are evergreen, needle-leaved, cone- 
bearing trees. In general, they grow as rigidly 
upright, pyramidal trees, reaching more than 
100' in height. They make impressive speci­
men trees on large properties. Their large 
size, formal habit, and tendency to lose their 
lower branches make spruces less desirable 
for the average home landscape.
Before you plant a spruce, be sure you 
have enough room to let the tree reach its 
normal size; it may be small when you bring it 
home, but it will grow surprisingly fast! Set 
out in spring as balled-and-burlapped plants 
on a sunny or lightly shaded site. Spruces need 
a moist but well-drained, slightly acid soil with 
lots of organic matter. They grow best in cool, 
northern climates.
Caution: When controlling pests, be aware

PICEA ■ 
181
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
(Picea spp.)
Branches w ith brown
Cause: Spruce budworms. 
caterpillars mine into older needles** 
ihen shoot tips: later consume new foliage!
Leaves light gray or bronze. 
Cause: Spruce spider mites. Trees' 
have an overall grayish or yellowish 
color: pests may form tiny webs 
on branches. 
/
Y3 2 ' Adult
K. V " 
k  Larva
. Adult 
to Wa' 
wingspan
\  \  Shoot tips with 
conelike swellings.
Cause: Spruce gall adelgids./
Oall5 are green, then turn pink 
*S 
or brown and persist on the branches.
that oil sprays will remove the blue color from 
the foliage of blue spruces until new normal 
foliage is produced. Other spruce species may 
also be sensitive to oil sprays; read the prod­
uct label, apply at a reduced rate if recom­
mended, and test spray on a branch before 
treating the whole plant.
Problems
Branches with brown tips. Cause: Spruce 
budworms. This pest is widely distributed over 
the northern United States. The brown. 1" 
caterpillars have 2 rows of white dots along 
their backs; they tunnel into opening buds, 
destroying the terminals and gradually migrat­
ing to the younger foliage, leaving the tree 
looking as if it had been swept by fire. See
above for an illustration of this pest.
Handpicking works if only a few caterpil­
lars are present; usually, however, they are so 
numerous as to require an application of BTK. 
Remember to reapply after rain.
Leaves light gray or bronze. Cause: 
Spruce spider mites. These tiny, spiderlike 
pests damage needles as they feed; the injury 
weakens the plant and can kill young trees. 
Mites start feeding on lower, older needles 
and progress upward and outward; tiny webs 
may be visible on needles. See above for an 
illustration of this pest.
Control in spring with dormant oil before 
growth starts: see caution above before spray­
ing. During active growth, spray plants repeat­
edly with strong jets of water. For severe

182 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PIANT GUIDE
infestations, make 2 applications of insectici­
dal soap 7-10 days apart, or apply pyrethrin as 
a last resort.
Shoot tips with conelike swellings. Cause: 
Spruce gall adelgids. The pests themselves 
are seldom seen; in the spring the young insects 
feed on the new needles, causing the spruce 
to produce galls that enclose the pests. The 
adelgids mature in the galls, and the adults 
emerge in mid- to late summer. They overwin­
ter as nymphs or adults. See page 181 for an 
illustration of this pest.
If there are only a few galls, prune them 
off before they open in July. For serious 
infestations, spray the plant with insecticidal 
soap as new growth starts the following spring. 
Or apply a dormant oil spray over the whole 
plant in late winter to kill overwintering pests; 
see caution above before spraying.
Leaves discolored; branch tips webbed. 
Cause: Spruce needleminers. The V2", green­
ish caterpillars feed at the base of needles, 
mining as they go, and sometimes web together 
the needles at the tips of twigs. Control by 
spraying the plant with a strong blast of water 
in fall or late winter to knock the webs and 
loose needles from the tree; then clean up all 
fallen debris.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. For controls, see 
“Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags' on page 236.
Plant defoliated. Causes: Gypsy moths; 
sawflies. See “Plant defoliated” or “Leaves 
skeletonized” on page 236 for controls.
Terminal shoot curled and brown. Cause : 
White pine weevils. For more information, 
see “Terminal shoot curled and brown” on 
page 183.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. For controls, 
see “Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break o ff’ on page 238.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237 for controls.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. For more 
information, see “Trunk or branches with 
oozing lesions; branch tips die back” on page 
238.
Branch tips die back. Cause: Blight. This 
fungal disease attacks mostly during cool, wet 
weather. Good air circulation among trees 
discourages its onset. Leaves of infected plants 
shrivel and twigs die back. Cut off and destroy 
dead or diseased wood. In a very cool, wet 
spring, you can spray with bordeaux mix, start­
ing when new growth appears on the trees and 
repeating at 2-week intervals until the weather 
gets warmer and drier.
Leaves yellow and drop. Cause: Rust. 
Whitish blisters on the undersides of the leaves 
followed by yellowing and leaf drop indicates 
rust. Prune out and destroy infected branch 
tips. To reduce the spread of mild infections, 
spray with sulfur, repeating 2 or 3 times at 
weekly intervals.
Pieris
Pieris. Shrubs.
Pieris are broad-leaved, evergreen shrubs. 
The waxy, white flowers are borne in terminal 
clusters and open in early spring. Pieris are 
used in foundation plantings and are ideal for 
woodland gardens.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
or container-grown plants. Moist but well- 
drained, acid soils with lots of organic matter 
suit them best. Apply an organic mulch to 
keep down weeds and maintain a cool, moist

FINI S 
■ 
183
root zone. Pieris thrive in sun or partial shade; 
plants will survive in dense shade, but flow­
er less.
Pieris are subject to some of the insects 
and diseases that attack rhododendron; see 
the Rhododendron entry beginning on page 
200 for symptoms and controls.
Pinus
Pine. Shrubs and trees.
Pines are needle-leaved, cone-bearing ever­
greens important both for their wood and orna­
mental value. In the landscape, some are useful 
as informal screens, others as hedges and foun­
dation plants, and the more picturesque ones 
as specimens in the lawn or rock garden.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
plants. A well-drained, somewhat acid soil en­
riched with organic matter suits them best. Pines 
prefer full sun, but will grow, although with a 
somewhat more open habit, in partial shade.
Problems
Branches dead; bark with yellow-orange 
blisters. Cause: White pine blister rust. This 
fungal disease needs 2 kinds of plants to com­
plete its life cycle: a pine and a currant or 
gooseberry plant. While it does little damage 
to currants or gooseberries, this disease can 
quickly kill infected pines. It enters through 
the needles and grows into the bark, where it 
causes cankers that can girdle stems and 
branches. These cankers develop orange-yellow 
blisters that release spores. See page 184 for 
an illustration of these symptoms.
Avoid planting white or other 5-needled 
pines within 200 feet of currants or gooseberries. 
For other controls, see "Trunk or branches
with oozing lesions; branch tips die back" on 
page 238.
Leaves brown at base; shoots ooze resin.
Cause: Tip blight. This fungal disease causes 
needles to brown in early and midsummer, 
when they are about half their normal size. 
Entire shoot tips may be killed, most com­
monly on lower branches. Resin oozing from 
infected twigs is another common symptom. 
See page 184 for an illustration of these 
symptoms.
Tip blight most commonly attacks old or 
stressed trees. To avoid problems, keep plants 
growing vigorously with proper pruning, 
mulching, and watering (during drought). 
Remove the source of infection by pruning 
out dead branches during dry autumn weather. 
(Sterilize pruners between cuts in a solution 
of 1 part bleach to 9 parts water.) Also clean 
up fallen cones and other debris around the 
base of the tree. The following spring, spray 
with bordeaux mix when the new shoots start 
to grow: repeat when the shoots are half-grown 
and again 2 weeks later.
Branches with brown tips. Causes: Pine 
tip and pine shoot moths; spruce budworms. 
For an illustration of pine shoot moths, see 
page 184; for spruce budworms, see page 181.
The larvae of these pests all cause similar 
damage, boring into the bases of needles and 
tunneling into shoot tips all over the plant. 
Their damage differs from that of white pine 
weevils in that the weevils only attack the top 
shoot (leader) of a plant. Handpicking works 
if only a few caterpillars are present. Pruning 
off and destroying infested tips in winter is a 
very effective control. Spraying with BTK be­
fore the caterpillars enter the shoots may be 
effective.
Terminal shoot curled and brown. Cause: 
White pine weevils. The 
pale yellow lar­
vae bore into the terminal shoot, distorting 
and eventually killing it. The 
mottled brown
adult weevils emerge in late summer to feed

184 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
{Finns spp.)
Larvae
Plant
5jgg>~aefoHated.
^S jause; Sawflies. 
The caterpillar like 
vae eat old and new 
nye; shoot tips may 
left bare.
ives brow n at base; sh o o ts 0 0 2
in. Cause: Tip blight. Resin holds 
§  dead needles in place; disease 
atlacks lower branches first. _  
C v T O ^ e n  moves
uPwafdi ^
Adult
Larva
wingspai
w Branches dead; bark w ith yellow -orange blisters.
Cause: White pine blister rusL Blisters seep resin 
and eventually spread to the trunk, girdling il.
Branches with 
brow n tips. Cause: Pine 
slK>ot moths. Larvae burrow 
In stem tips, which continue 
growing but ate deformed.
on buds and bark. Reduce populations of adults 
by spraying weekly with pyrethrin as long as 
adults are visible. Early in the season, cut off 
damaged shoots several inches below the 
affected area. To replace the damaged leader, 
select a horizontal branch right below the cut 
and fasten it to a stake in an upright position.
Bark damaged; leaves yellowish. Causes: 
Beetles: weevils: pine bark adelgids. A wide 
variety of pests attack the bark of pines. Bee­
tles and weevils make small holes in the trunk 
where they bore through the bark and tunnel 
underneath. Pine bark adelgids are small, 
cottony, white insects that congregate on the 
bark of the trunk and limbs.
Beetles and weevils most commonly attack 
already stressed trees, so the best control for 
these pests is prevention. Keep trees growing 
vigoa>usly by watering during dry spells; fertilize 
if plants are injured or stressed.
Control adelgids by spraying the plant 
several times, a day or two apart, with a strong 
blast of water. For more serious infestations, 
spray the trunk and branches with insecticidal 
soap every 3 days until the pests are gone.
Leaves light gray or bronze. Cause: 
Spruce spider mites. For an illustration of this 
pest, see page 181. For control measures, see 
“Leaves light gray or bronze” on page 181.
Leaves discolored and drop. Cause: 
Needlecasts. Several kinds of fungi attack pine 
foliage, causing spots or bands or total brown­
ing of the needles. These symptoms usually 
appear in early spring the year after the nee­
dles are infected. Planting trees where they 
will have good air circulation is the best way 
to avoid problems. Cleaning up fallen needles 
and pruning out damaged tips will help reduce 
the source of infection. To avoid symptoms 
the following year, spray with bordeaux mix

PLA3XNUS ■ 
185
when the new shoots are half-grown; repeat 2 
weeks later.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. Several 
kinds of fungi cause cankers on pines. For 
more information, see “Trunk or branches 
with oozing lesions; branch tips die back” on 
page 238.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
Several kinds of caterpillars feed on pines. For 
control information, see “Leavesskeletonized 
or with large holes; branches may be webbed” 
and “Plant defoliated” on page 236.
Plant defoliated. Cause: Sawflies. Sev­
eral species of sawflies cause similar damage 
in midsummer or early fall. For an illustration 
of the pests and their damage, see the opposite 
page. Natural parasites usually keep them in 
check. If necessary, handpick the white, green, 
or brown, caterpillar-like larvae. For severe 
infestations, spray the plant with insecticidal 
soap, or pyrethrin as a last resort.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. R>r control measures, 
see “Plant defoliated ; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags” on page 236.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. For more 
information, see “Trunk or branches with small 
holes; limbs die or break off' on page 238.
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. The 
brown larvae of the pine leafminers enter the 
leaves and excavate them. Injured tips turn 
yellow and dry up. See “Leaves tunneled” on 
page 237 for control measures.
Branches with knotlike swellings. Cause: 
Gall rusts. Large galls, up to several inches in 
diameter, form on branches and eventually 
release yellowish spores. Pine-pine gall rusts 
produce spores that only infect pines; pine-
oak gall rusts also attack oak trees, causing 
galls on their leaves. Control both kinds by 
pruning the galls from pine trees as soon as 
you spot them.
Leaves yellow and wilt. Cause: Root rot. 
For more information, see “Leaves yellow and 
wilt" on page 237.
Platanus
Sycamore, planetree. Trees.
Sycamores are deciduous, alternate-leaved 
trees with colorful, exfoliating bark and ball­
shaped fruit. They are widely used as street 
trees since they withstand urban conditions.
Set out sycamores in spring or fall, plant­
ing in full sun or very light shade. They are 
remarkably tolerant of a range of soil conditions.
Problems
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac­
nose. This fungal disease is very common on 
American planetree (Platanus occidentals); 
London planetree (P x acerifolia) is gener­
ally more resistant. For control information, 
see “Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots" on page 238.
Trunk and branches with elongated, sunken, 
cracked areas; leaves yellow or sparse. Cause: 
Canker stain. This is a serious disease that can 
spread quickly, girdling and killing branches 
or the whole tree. Remove and destroy seri­
ously affected trees. Prevention is the best 
control; avoid creating any wounds that allow 
the disease to enter the tree. Summer pruning, 
for example, often encourages canker stain 
on the branches; winter pruning is best. Also, 
be careful when using lawn mowers or other 
equipment around the tree to avoid damage 
to the trunk.

186 
■ 
PROBLF.M-SOLVING PLANT Gl 'IDE
Leaves stippled with red or yellow spots.
Cause: Sycamore lace bugs. This widespread 
and serious pest feeds on the undersides of 
planetree foliage. As the '/io", silvery white 
lace bugs feed, they puncture the leaves and 
then exude a toxin that turns the area around 
these punctures red or yellow. Spraying leaves 
with insecticidal soap just after the leaves unfold 
should control this pest.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. For control informa­
tion, see “Leaves with powdery white coat­
ing" on page 237.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
‘Trunk or branches with oozing lesions: branch 
tips die back" on page 238.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots” on page 237.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. Heavy infes­
tations can seriously weaken the tree; see 
“Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered with 
small bumps" on page 237 for controls.
Trunk with shelflike growths. Cause: 
Wood rots. A number of fungus-caused wood 
rots can occur; see “Trunk with shelflike 
growths" on page 238.
Plum
IYunus spp. (Rosaceae)
Plums are deciduous trees that grow from 
5' to 20' depending on soil, rootstock, and 
cultivar. Japanese plums [Prunus salic ina) bear 
fruit on spurs—short branches that elongate 
only a fraction of an inch per year— 1 year old 
or older. European (P domestica) and hybrid 
plums bear fruit on spurs 2 years old or older. 
Plums are hardy in Zones 4-10. depending on 
species and cultivar.
Plant plums in a well-drained, sunny site 
free of late spring frosts. Prune European plums 
to a central leader and Japanese plums to a 
modified central leader (see the illustration 
on page 102). For more pruning information, 
see "Pruning and Training" on page 101. Some 
plum s need cross-pollination; for more 
information, see “Setting Fruit" on page 101.
Fruit Problems
Young fruit with crescent-shaped scars.
Cause: Plum curculios. These beetles appear 
around bloom time and leave a characteristic 
scar as they lay eggs in fruit. Infested fruit 
usually drops. Egg-laying ceases by early 
summer, but insects return later in the season 
to feed.
Botanical sprays don’t control curculios 
adequately. To control this pest, spread a drop- 
cloth beneath the tree and jar it with a padded 
mallet. Collect and destroy curculios that fall 
onto the sheet. For best results, jar the tree 
twice a day. beginning as soon as you see the 
first scarred fruit. In addition, collect and 
discard dropped fruit to prevent newly laid 
eggs from hatching. A traditional control is to 
keep chickens beneath the trees to consume 
adult curculios and grubs from fallen fruit.
Fruit with small brown spots that enlarge 
and grow fuzzy in humid weather. Cause: 
Brown rot. Leaves and flowers may also turn 
brown. The cultivars *AU-Rosa’ and ‘Crimson’ 
resist this fungus. For more information, see 
“Fruit with small brown spots that enlarge and 
grow fuzzy in humid weather" on page 166.
Fruit with brown, sunken spots on the 
surface. Cause: Bacterial leaf spot. Brown 
or black angular leaf spots may also appear. 
This disease isn’t curable, although copper 
spray offers partial control. Resistant culti­
vars include ‘A U -A m ber\ ’Crimson’, and 
‘Simon’. For more information and control 
measures, see “Fruit with small, dark, sunken 
spots or cracks on skin" on page 166.

PORTl'LACA ■ 
187
Leaf and Branch Problems
New leaves twisted or curled and covered 
with a sticky coating. Cause: Aphids. R)r heavy 
infestations, apply a strong spray of water or 
insecticidal soap solution to trees. For more 
control information, see “New leaves twisted 
or curled and covered with a sticky coating" 
on page 67.
TWigs and branches bearing tarry, black 
galls. Cause: Black knot. To control this fun­
gal gall, prune out branches a few inches below 
galls. Resistant cultivars include ‘AU-Producer,’ 
‘Crimson’, ‘Milton’, ‘President’, and ‘Shiro’.
Branches wilting and dying, foil to leaf 
out in spring. Causes: Bacterial canker: Valsa 
canker. Look on the branches for sunken, ellip­
tical lesions, often oozing a reddish gum. For 
more inform ation and controls for these 
diseases, see “Branches wilting and dying, fail 
to leaf out in spring” on page 167. The culti­
vars ‘AU-Am ber’, ‘California’, ’Crim son', 
‘D uarte’, ‘Hom eside’, and ‘President’ are 
resistant. ‘Myrobalan’ rootstock confers some 
resistance.
Tree stunted or dying. Cause: Plum leaf 
scale. This disease is common in the Southeast. 
There is no cure. Dig up infected plants and 
replant with a resistant cultivar such as 
‘AU-Rosa’ or ‘AU-Amber’.
Populus
Poplar Trees.
Poplars are deciduous trees, generally fast- 
growing and weak-wooded. Male and female 
flowers appear on different plants. Females 
produce cottony seeds, so choose male culti­
vars Co minimize the mess.
Easy to grow, poplars need full sun but 
can adapt to a range of soil conditions. They
have spreading roots that can invade drains 
and water pipes; make sure you site plants 
away from these features. The extensive root 
system makes poplars tolerant of drought. These 
trees are naturally short-lived and are prone to 
many pest problems.
Problems
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. This is a 
widespread and serious problem on poplars. 
For more information, see “Trunk or branches 
with oozing lesions; branch tips die back" on 
page 238.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. A number of 
different borers attack poplars; see ‘‘Trunk 
or branches with small holes; limbs die or 
break off” on page 238 for controls.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
foliage may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
For control information, see ‘‘Leaves skeleton­
ized or with large holes; foliage may be webbed" 
on page 236.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with pow­
dery white coating" on page 237.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. For controls, 
see “Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps" on page 237.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves wrinkled and discolored" 
on page 235 for controls.
Portulaca
Moss rose, garden portulaca. Annuals.
These bright-flowered, mat-forming annu­
als come in several colors, including red, purple, 
pink, white, and yellow. The ruffled flowers

188 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT G l’lDE
are 1" wide. Plants grow 4"-8" high and can 
spread to 1 'fi'. Flowers open in sunlight and 
close with dusk or cloudy skies.
Sow seed indoors 7 weeks before the last 
frost date. Set plants out in late spring when 
the soil is warm. Direct-seed outdoors in warm 
soil and full sun after last frost. Mix the tiny 
seed with sand to get an even distribution. 
Press seeds down firmly, but don’t bury them. 
Water gently, keeping the soil moist until seed­
lings appear (about 10 days).
Drought-tolerant moss rose thrives in rocky 
soil or sand. It enjoys full sun, high tempera­
tures, and good drainage. Pests and diseases 
are seldom a problem.
Potato
Solatium tuberosum (Solanaceae)
Potatoes are annual vegetables grown for 
their nutritious, starchy tubers. They are com­
monly known as white potatoes, but different 
cultivars have white, yellow, pink, or even blu­
ish flesh, and yellow, brown, red, or purple skin.
Culture
Potatoes require deeply worked, well- 
drained soil with lots of organic matter, and a 
pH between 5.0 and 6.8. Potatoes require mod­
erate to high levels of nitrogen, phosphorus, 
potassium, calcium, and sulfur. Have the soil 
tested and amend as needed before planting. 
Gypsum is a good source of calcium and sul­
fur for potatoes.
Keep soil moist, but not soggy, and do not 
allow it to dry out. Alternating dry and wet 
soil can cause cracked or knobby tubers. Once 
tops begin to yellow near harvest, you can let 
the soil dry out without damaging tubers.
Do not plant potatoes where tomatoes, 
potatoes, eggplants, peppers, strawberries, or 
brambles have been planted within the past 
4-5 years. Also, try to plan your planting scheme 
to separate these crops in the garden. Don't 
plant potatoes where sod or small grains were 
grown the previous year: Wireworms, a com­
mon sod pest, also feed on potato tubers. 
Compost or till under all plant residues at the 
end of the season. Tilling the soil helps pre­
vent pests from overwintering.
Potatoes are usually grown from seed pota­
toes (tubers) or “buds' (tiny tissue-cultured 
tubers), but a few cultivars, such as ‘Explorer 
and ‘Homestead Hybrid’, are grown from true 
seeds. Prevent problems by planting only cer­
tified disease-free tubers. Planting true seeds 
or buds also helps avoid many tuber-borne 
diseases.
Pre-condition tubers by storing them 
between 65° and 70°F for 2 weeks before 
planting to encourage rapid growth. Soak pieces 
in compost tea for several hours before plant­
ing to help prevent disease problems. Plant 
them out when soil is at least 40°F
Leaf and Whole Plant Problems
Sprouts fail to emerge; seed pieces rot.
Cause: Various fungal and bacterial rots. Soak 
seed pieces in compost tea before planting to 
help suppress diseases. Plant in well-drained, 
warmed soil and cover lightly to encourage rapid 
sprouting. Cold, wet soil encourages rot.
Leaves discolored and puckered or curled. 
Causes: Leafhoppers: aphids; viral diseases; 
bacterial ring rot. If leaves have yellow patches 
and brown edges, look for leafhoppers—tiny 
green or brown insects that suck plant sap and 
hop, scuttle sideways, or fly when disturbed. 
Spray with insecticidal soap or pyrethrin to 
control. Prevent infestations by covering plants 
with row cover when they come up.
If leaves are stippled yellow and stunted, 
look for aphids. Potato aphids are tiny pink

POTATO ■ 
189
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
Leaves with 
water-soaked brown 
Cause: Late blight. Potatoes 
have dark, purplish blotches 
on skin; dark, corky areas 
in flesh.
Potatoes riddled with tunnels.
Cause: Wireworms. Wireworms are 
yellowish brown, hard, segmented
larvae.
i r
Larva
Potatoes with gray to
jblack areas in flesh; 
centers may be hollow.
Cause: Waterlogged soil; 
temperature extremes. Rot 
organisms may invade cavities.
insects and are often found on young leaves. 
For mild infestations, knock pests off plants 
with a blast of water. Spray plants with insecti­
cidal soap in the evening to control. Prevent 
infestations by covering plants with row cover 
when they come up.
If leaf edges roll upward and are yellow- 
green, the plants may have leafroll virus. Destroy 
infected plants. Prevent problems by control­
ling aphids, which spread the disease as they 
feed, or by planting resistant cultivars such as 
‘Katahdin and ‘Yukon Gold’. If leaves are 
dark green or mottled with yellow, the plants 
have one of many viral diseases. Destroy 
infected plants. Prevent problems by control­
ling aphids that spread viruses.
If eaves turn yellow between the veins 
and curl upward, the plant is probably suffer­
ing from bacterial ring rot. Shoots are stunted
at the tip and may wilt. Wilted stems cut near 
the soil exude a whitish ooze. Destroy infected 
plants. Prevent problems by planting certified 
disease-free seed and by washing knife after 
each tuber while cutting seed pieces.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted and may be 
wilted. Causes: White grubs; tuberworms; 
wireworms; black leg; root knot nematodes; 
Verticillium wilt. If plants wilt suddenly, look 
for fat white grubs with brown heads, pinkish 
white larvae, or yellow to reddish brown, hard, 
segmented larvae chewing on roots or tubers. 
See “Potatoes riddled with tunnels” on page 
191 for descriptions and controls.
If the stem is black and shrunken for a few 
inches above the soil line, the plant has black 
leg, a bacterial disease. Destroy diseased plants. 
To avoid black leg, plant potatoes in well- 
drained soil, and don’t overwater. Cultivars

190 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PI ANT GUIDE
such as ‘Atlantic', ‘Katahdin’, ‘Kennebec’, and 
Red Pontiac’ are resistant.
Stunted roots with swollen galls and tubers 
with warty skin are symptoms of root knot 
nematode infestation. Tubers are edible if 
peeled. Destroy infested plants: do not com­
post them. To control these pests, apply chitin 
or parasitic nematodes to the soil.
If r<K>ts and stem are undamaged, the 
plants may have Verticillium wilt. Stems cut 
near the soil line are discolored inside. This fun­
gal disease usually appears when the plants 
flower. Destroy infected plants. Prevent prob­
lems by planting tolerant cultivars such as 
Beltsville’ and ‘Rhinered’.
Leaves with gray-brown, concentrically 
ringed spots. Cause: Early blight. Spots may 
merge and cover entire leaf, which then yellows 
and falls off. This fungal disease is active during 
warm, rainy weather. Spray plants with cop­
per or bordeaux mix if symptoms are present 
and weather is warm and wet. Prevent prob­
lems by spraying plants with an antitranspirant 
before symptoms appear if you have had prob­
lems in the past, or by planting resistant culti­
vars such as ‘Butte’, ‘Kennebec’, and ‘Krantz’.
Leaves with water-soaked brown spots. 
Cause: Late blight. Spots expand rapidly and 
develop a light halo. A white, velvety growth 
appears on the undersides of spots in wet 
weather. Stems are also infected and become 
dark and water-soaked. This fungal disease is 
active during moderately warm, rainy weather. 
Spray plants with copper if symptoms are pres­
ent and weather remains wet to stop further 
symptom development. Prevent disease prob­
lems by spraying plants with compost extract 
when they come up and every 2 weeks through­
out the season or by planting tolerant cultivars 
such as Butte, ‘Cherokee’, ‘Katahdin’, Ken­
nebec’, ‘Krantz’, Onoway*. ‘Rosa’, and ‘Sebago’.
Leaves with small holes. Cause: Rea 
beetles. Treat plants with pyrethrin spray or 
dust to control flea beetles if damage is severe. 
These tiny black, brown, or bronze insects
hop when disturbed. Prevent problems by cov­
ering newly planted potatoes with row cover 
until they get large and able to tolerate insect 
damage. Apply parasitic nematodes to the 
soil to help control overwintering flea beetle 
larvae in the soil.
leaves with large, ragged holes or leaves 
missing. Causes: Colorado potato beetles; 
blister beetles. Colorado potato beetles are 
oval, yellowish orange, hard-shelled, ’A" long 
beetles with black stripes. Larvae are soft- 
bodied, humpbacked, dark orange grubs with 
2 rows of black spots down each side of their 
bodies. Eggs are orange and laid in rows on 
undersides of leaves. Overwintering adults 
appear on young plants in spring: handpick 
beetles zealously to reduce subsequent gen­
erations. Squash any eggs you see as well. 
Spray plants with BTSD as soon as you see 
any larvae. Prevent problems by covering 
plants with row cover before beetles appear. A 
thick mulch of loose straw around the plants 
may help prevent Colorado potato beetle 
damage.
Blister beetles are W  long, elongated 
and thin, metallic, black, blue, purple, or brown 
insects. Wear gloves to handpick, since these 
beetles secrete a substance that may cause 
blisters. Spray plants with pyrethrin if damage 
is severe. Blister beetle larvae help control 
grasshoppers, so think twice before spraying 
to control them if grasshoppers are a problem 
in your area.
TYiber Problems
Potatoes small. Causes: Poor growing 
conditions; calcium deficiency. See “Culture” 
on page 188 for growing guidelines. If soil test 
indicates calcium deficiency, amend soil as 
needed.
Potatoes with green patches on skin.
Cause: Exposure to light. Tubers exposed to 
light often turn green and develop a toxic 
substance known as solanine. Peel off green

POTATO 
■ 
191
tissue before eating. Prevent greening by hill­
ing plants with soil or mulch and renewing it 
as necessary. Store potatoes in the dark.
Potatoes with brown or black spots or 
patches on skin. Cause: Scurf. Peel off spots 
before using tubers. Soak seed pieces in com­
post tea before planting to help suppress fun­
gal diseases. Do not plant spotted tubers: The 
resulting plants will produce only small tubers, 
many of which will rot.
Potatoes with rough, corky spots on skin. 
Cause: Scab. Trim out spots before using tubers. 
Prevent this fungal disease by keeping soil pH 
below 5.5 and planting resistant cultivars such 
as ‘Beltsville’, ‘Norland’, ‘Onoway’, ‘Pungo’, 
‘Rhinered’, ‘Russet Burbank*, ‘Russian Banana’, 
and ‘Superior’.
Potatoes with wartlike bumps. Cause: 
Root knot nematodes. See “Leaves yellow; 
plant stunted and may be wilted’’ on page 189 
for controls.
Potatoes knobby. Cause: Uneven soil 
moisture. If tuber growth is interrupted because 
of lack of soil moisture, tubers are often 
deformed. Keep soil moist, but not soggy, and 
never let it dry out.
Potatoes with a black, rotted ring at stem 
ends. Cause: Bacterial ring rot. Tubers have 
a soft, light brown ring in the flesh near the 
skin. See “Leaves discolored and puckered or 
curled" on page 188 for controls.
Potatoes with dark blotches on skin; flesh 
with dark, corky areas. Causes: Early blight; 
late blight. Trim out corky areas before using; 
discard severely affected tubers. See “Leaves 
with gray-brown, concentrically ringed spots" 
and “Leaves with water-soaked brown spots" 
above for controls.
Potatoes with gray to black areas in flesh; 
centers may be hollow. Causes: Waterlogged 
soil; extreme temperatures; potassium or phos­
phorus deficiency; mechanical injury; viral 
disease. Potatoes grown in wet, poorly drained 
soil often grow too fast and may develop a 
discolored and/or hollow area in the center.
Prevent problems by keeping soil moist, but 
not soggy.
Extremely hot weather or cold snaps before 
potatoes are harvested can cause similar 
symptoms. Prevent problems by keeping tubers 
well-covered with hilled-up soil or mulch.
Phosphorus or potassium deficiency can 
cause spots or patches of dark flesh. Oversize 
tubers with hollow centers may also indicate 
potassium deficiency. If deficiencies are 
suspected, have soil tested and amend as 
needed. If plants show symptoms of phospho­
rus deficiency, raise soil pH to 6.0 so the min­
eral will be more available to the plants.
Rough handling can cause mechanical 
injury, such as bruising, that appears as discol­
ored areas on the flesh. Handle tubers gently 
when harvesting and storing to prevent prob­
lems. Plants suffering from viral diseases may 
produce deformed or discolored tubers. See 
“Leaves discolored and puckered or curled" 
on page 188 for controls.
Potatoes riddled with tunnels. Causes: 
Tuberworm s; wireworms. If tubers have 
browned, silk-lined tunnels, look for tuber­
worms. These pinkish white larvae are xh" 
long and feed in tubers, stems, and leaves. 
Destroy infested tubers and plants. Prevent 
problems by keeping tubers hilled with soil as 
they grow and by removing the dead vines 
before digging tubers. Cover plants with row 
cover to prevent adult moths from laying eggs.
Wireworms are yellow to reddish brown, 
hard, segmented larvae up to Vh" long that 
tunnel into tubers and chew on roots. Adults 
are dark-colored, elongated click beetles. Apply 
parasitic nematodes to the soil before plant­
ing to control them. Avoid planting potatoes 
where sod or grain grew the previous season, 
because wireworms are often numerous there.
Potatoes spoil in storage. Cause: Bacte­
rial or fungal rots. Poor growing conditions or 
improper curing or storage may encourage 
various rot diseases. See “Culture" on page 
188 for growing guidelines.

192 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Let vines yellow and dry before carefully 
digging tubers. Sort out any bruised, cut, cold 
injured, or diseased potatoes and keep them 
cool (around 40°F) until they can be used. 
Cure healthy tubers by storing them between 
50° and 60°F for 2-3 weeks, then store them 
between 35° and 45°F in a humid place.
Primula
Primrose. Perennials.
This large genus includes more than 400 
species of mostly low-growing plants noted 
for numerous brightly colored and often fra­
grant blossoms. The many species, hybrids, 
and cultivars range from 5" to over 2’ tall. 
Spring flowers bloom in a wide range of colors. 
Primrose foliage is coarse and crinkled; large, 
bright green leaves form a rosette below the 
flowers.
Primroses are hardy (some to Zone 3), 
but prefer humid regions without extreme heat 
or cold. Moisture is critical for primroses; few 
tolerate any drought. Plant in partial shade in 
well-drained, rich, organic soil. Healthy prim­
roses have few pest problems. Low leaves and 
moist soil attract slugs; see ‘‘Leaves with large, 
ragged holes” on page 177 for controls.
Pyracantha
Firethom. Shrubs.
Firethoms are thorny, evergreen plants 
grown for their handsome glossy foliage and 
the persistent red. orange, or yellow fruit.
Firethoms adapt well to foundation plantings; 
upright cultivars are excellent for hedges.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
or container-grown plants in full sun or light 
shade. Avoid alkaline soils and locations sub­
ject to strong winter winds. When possible, 
choose disease-resistant cultivars like ‘Apache’, 
‘Mohave’, or ‘Teton’.
Problems
Leaves, flowers, and branches blackened.
Cause: Fire blight. This bacterial disease causes 
new shoots to wilt suddenly, turn dark, and 
die back. The disease eventually spreads, kill­
ing the whole plant. Lush new growth is par­
ticularly susceptible, so avoid overfertilizing. 
Prune out diseased tissue, cutting back at 
least 6" beyond the discolored area; destroy 
or dispose of prunings. Disinfect pruners after 
each cut in a 10 percent bleach solution (1 
part bleach to 9 parts water). Spray bordeaux 
mix the following spring during flowering.
Leaves and berries with black, scabby areas. 
Cause: Scab. Infected leaves eventually turn 
yellow and brown before falling off the plant. 
Damaged fruit is unsightly. Clean up fallen 
leaves and berries. The following year, spray 
plants twice, 2 weeks apart, with bordeaux mix.
Leaves skeletonized; branches webbed. 
Cause: Webworms. These 1", pale green to 
nearly black caterpillars have a dark or light 
stripe down the back and 3 dark spots on the 
side of each segment. They feed on leaves and 
spin silken webs around leaves and stems. Young 
plants may die; older ones can be seriously 
weakened. Break up and remove the webs; 
spray leaves with BTK.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See ‘‘Leaves wrinkled and discolored” 
on page 235 for controls.
Leaves pale and mottled. Cause: Lace 
bugs. These */io", dark-colored bugs have lacy- 
patterned wings. They feed on the undersides 
of leaves and deposit small black spots of

Q l FERGUS ■ 
193
excrement. Severe infestations can cause early 
leaf drop. Control by spraying leaves (espe­
cially the undersides) with superior oil or insec­
ticidal soap.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See "Leaves
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps" on page 237 for more information. 
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed.
Cause: Spider mites. See "Leaves stippled 
with yellow; foliage webbed" on page 236 
for controls.
Quercus
Oak. Trees.
Oaks typically have large, lobed leaves 
and rough bark; they are mostly slow-growing 
and long-lived, valued both for their oma- 
menta effect and for their wood. Those suit­
able for northern planting are deciduous; there 
are a number of evergreen oaks grown in the 
South. The larger species are primarily used 
as ornamentals on large properties; some of 
the shorter-growing ones are valued as street 
trees and for smaller gardens.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
plants. Full sun and deep, fertile, well-drained, 
somewhat acid soils suit them best. Oaks vary 
in their moisture requirements; ask your local 
nursery owner or extension agent about the 
needs of the oak trees you have.
Problems
Plant defoliated. Cause: Gypsy moths. 
The larvae of the gypsy moth are particularly 
fond of oaks and can easily defoliate a tree. 
See page 194 for an illustration of the pest and 
the damage it causes. For control measures, 
see ‘‘Plant defoliated" on page 236.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
Many caterpillars feed on oak foliage. See 
“Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed” on page 236.
Leaves or stem s with brown, white, or 
green swellings. Cause: Galls. A number of 
tiny mites and insects feed on oaks, causing 
swellings on leaves and twigs. For an illustra­
tion of common oak galls, see page 194. Dam­
age is rarely serious. Prune off and destroy 
affected leaves and twigs.
Leaves with roundish, puckered areas. 
Cause: Leaf blister. This fungal disease causes 
yellowish white blisters, up to Vi" in diameter,

194 
■ 
PROBIJ-M-SOLV1NG PIANT GUIDE
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
^ iO A K  (Querciis spp.)
7 
Adult 
W  wingspan
fL e a v e so r ^
^  stem s with brown^y 
whtte, or green swellings.
■ ' Cause: Galls. Many types form 
7 ^ ( “^n o ak ; swellings may be 
smooth or rough and woody, 
-^ p a p e ry . cottony, 
or pimplelike.
Plant defoliated.
7_J f SjvtZause: Gypsy moths.
K ( Leaves skeletonized or with 
, /  ( {large holes; powdery, light 
( 
brown masses on trunks 
and branches.
Leaves with roundish, puckered areas.
■Cause: Leaf blister. Spots yellowish white 
at first, then die and turn brown.
on oak foliage. For an illustration of leaf blister, 
see above. Although symptoms may appear 
serious, little actual harm is done to the tree, 
so control isn't necessary. To prevent damage 
the following year, spray branches with lime- 
sulfur or bordeaux mix before the buds open 
in spring.
Leaves with powdery white coating.
Cause: Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with pow­
dery white coating" on page 237 for controls.
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac­
nose. For controls, see “Leaves and shoots 
blackened; leaves with moist or brown sunken 
spots” on page 238.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. For more 
information, see “Trunk or branches with ooz­
ing lesions; branch tips die back” on page 238.
Leaf edges browned; leaves wilt and drop 
early. Cause: Oak wilt. Symptoms of this fun­
gal disease usually show up first on the top of 
the tree, eventually spreading to the lower 
branches. Infected trees die quickly, often within
1 year of infection. There is no cure; remove 
and destroy infected trees.
Leaves stippled with white. Cause: Oak 
lace bugs. Adult lace bugs are Vio", flattened, 
dark insects with lacy-patterned, silvery white 
wings. Both the adults and the tiny nymphs 
feed on the undersides of leaves, sucking the 
sap and producing a gray, splotched or stip­
pled appearance to the upper sides of the 
foliage. Leaves may curl, turn brown, and drop

RADISH 
■ 
195
early. At the first sign of damage, spray with 
insecticidal soap, paying particular attention 
to the undersides of the leaves. Repeat the 
application if pests reappear in mid- to late 
summer. For severe infestations, spray with 
superior oil. or pyrethrin as a last resort.
Leaves rolled and chewed. Cause: Leaf- 
rollers. These V2". green caterpillars form small 
webs on shoot tips and feed on leaves and 
buds inside. Break open webs and handpick 
larvae; spray BTK at first sign of damage.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. For 
controls, see "Leaves with spots” on page 237.
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. See 
“Leaves tunneled” on page 237 for controls.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. For controls, see "Leaves 
stippled with yellow; foliage webbed” on 
page 236.
Radish
Raphanus sativus (Cruciferae)
Radishes are annual and biennial vegeta­
bles grown for their crisp, peppery roots. Cer­
tain cultivars do not have fleshy roots, but are 
grown for their crunchy seed pods. Some Daikon 
radishes grow 2' roots.
Most radishes do best in cool, moist 
conditions. They need a pH between 5.5 and 
6.8 and light, relatively rich soil. Plant radishes 
as soon as soil can be worked in spring. Make 
small plantings weekly until early summer for 
a continuous supply of radishes. Tempera­
tures between 50° and 65°F produce the best 
radishes; growth above 75°F is poor. Some 
cultivars of Daikon radishes are designed for 
summer planting and will flower without form­
ing large roots if planted too early.
The secret to mild, tender radishes is 
rapid growth. Water heavily the first 2 weeks 
after they come up if soil is dry. A light appli­
cation of compost is usually enough for a 
good radish crop. Radishes will not tolerate 
soils high in salt.
Radishes are related to cabbage and suf­
fer from many of the same problems. Since 
leaves are not harvested, more insect damage 
can be tolerated than in cabbage plants. See 
the Cabbage entry beginning on page 52 for 
descriptions and controls. Prevent problems 
with Fusarium yellows by planting resistant 
cultivars such as ‘Fancy Red’, ‘Fuego’, ‘Red 
Devil B \ ‘Red King’, and ‘Red Pak\
Root Problems
Roots enlarged and clublike. Cause: Club 
root. Destroy plants suffering from this fungal 
disease. Prevent problem by rotating crops 
and providing good drainage. ‘Red King’ and 
‘Saxafire are tolerant cultivars.
Roots riddled with slimy, winding tunnels. 
Cause: Cabbage maggots. Maggots are white 
and '//'long. Adults look somewhat like house­
flies and lay eggs on the soil near the base of 
the plants. Frequent, light cultivation when 
plants are young helps to decrease maggot 
populations. Remove and destroy infested 
plants.
Roots small and imperfect. Causes: Nitro­
gen deficiency; phosphorus deficiency; lack 
of water; excessive heat; wrong season for 
cultivar. Yellow or pale leaves suggest nitro­
gen deficiency. Purple leaves suggest phos­
phorus deficiency. Spray leaves with compost 
tea or fish emulsion, or side-dress with com­
post to correct either deficiency. If soil was 
dry, water subsequent plantings well. Do not 
try to grow most radishes in the hottest sum­
mer months, wait till cooler fall weather. Plant­
ing radishes in the shade of other plants may 
extend the spring season somewhat. Check

196 ■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GLIDE
proper planting season before planting Daikon 
cultivars.
Roots tough and dry; flesh pithy with 
white spots. Cause: Excessive heat. Few 
radishes tolerate high summer temperatures. 
Select heat-tolerant cultivars or plant earlier 
or later.
Roots with rough, dark spots on skin.
Cause: Scab. This fungal disease is a problem 
in dry soil when pH is high and magnesium is 
low. Keep soil moist and maintain a pH below 
6.5. Spray foliage with Epsom salts (1 table­
spoon per gallon of water) or side-dress with 
compost to add magnesium.
Roots cracked; skin and flesh normal. 
Causes: Overmaturity; uneven soil moisture. 
Radishes are at their best for only a few days. 
If left unharvested, they quickly develop a 
harsh flavor and often crack open. Make small 
plantings every week until early summer for a 
continuous supply, and pull them as soon as 
ready. Keep soil evenly moist.
Roots cracked; skin rough; flesh dark. 
Causes: Downy mildew: black root. Prevent 
these fungal diseases by providing well-drained 
soil and by using a 4-year rotation.
Roots soft and shriveled. Cause: Cold 
injury. Protect roots with mulch below 32°E
Raspberry
Rubus spp. (Rosaceae)
Raspberries are perennials that usually 
bear fruit on second-year canes. Canes of black 
(Rubus occidentals), purple (/?. X  neglect us), 
and summer-bearing red (/?. idaeus) raspberries 
bear fruit in their second season of growth. 
Everbearing red raspberries bear in late sum­
mer on new canes and again the next summer 
farther down the same canes. Red raspberries 
spread by underground runners. Black and 
purple raspberries spread by taking root where 
cane tips touch the ground. Raspberries are 
hardy in Zones 3-9. depending on species and 
cultivar.
Culture
Plant in a sunny site with good air circu­
lation and well-drained soil. Start with disease- 
free stock. Plant in hills or rows well away 
from wild or abandoned raspberries, which 
may carry diseases. Provide posts or a wire 
fence to support the canes.
For black, purple, and summer-bearing 
red raspberries, cut off all fruit-bearing canes 
at ground level as soon as harvest is over, or 
when growth begins in the spring. In late win­
ter or early spring thin out new canes that 
emerged the previous season; save the sturdi­
est ones and leave 6 canes per hill or 6" spac­
ing between row-planted canes. Shorten lanky 
canes to 4-5'. Since black and purple raspber­
ries fruit most heavily on side branches, induce 
side branching during the summer by pinch­
ing the growing tips of canes when they reach 
V ti. The following late winter or early spring, 
shorten the side branches to about 1'.
For everbearing red raspberries, remove 
fruiting canes each summer as soon as the 
second fruiting is complete. Or sacrifice the 
second berry crop (which may be light any­
way) and cut the entire planting to the ground 
as soon as leaves drop in the fall. Although 
this approach yields only 1 crop instead of 2, it 
has several advantages. Pruning all canes to 
the ground eliminates winter injury to canes, 
results in vigorous new canes for next fall’s 
crop, and cuts down on overwintering pests 
that will appear next spring.
Raspberries are self-pollinating. A well- 
maintained planting may fruit heavily for many 
years, but disease often appears as plants age.

RASPBERRY ■ 
197
Canes with dark blotches; 
sldeshoots may wilt and 
canes may die. Cause: 
r  
v -  Anthracnose. |  
Centers of 
V v 'D f  * ^ le a f s p o ts  
4  
; 
may drop out.
Adult
RASPB
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
Mew canes die In 
m idsum m er. Cause: 
Verticillium wilt. Leaves 
turn dull green starting at 
bottom of plant: shoots wilt 
cane base turns blue-black.
Cane tips 
wilted and 
dying. Cause: 
Rednecked cane 
ers. Borers cause 
gali-like swellings 
on canes; canes 
break easily 
at swellings.
Fruit Infested with 
slender white grubs.
Cause: Raspberry fruitworms. Adults feed on flowers 
nd leaves; grubs may cause berries to drop before ripening.
Plan on establishing a new raspberry bed every 
10 years (less if plants begin to decline).
Fruit Problems
Fruit covered with light gray fuzz. Cause: 
Fruit rot. Especially common during wet 
weather, this fungal disease appears less fre­
quently where plants have good air circula­
tion and proper pruning. To control fruit rot, 
harvest berries often. Also pick and discard 
infected fruit far away from plants.
V ruit covered with a powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. This fungal disease, 
most common on red raspberries, makes fruit 
inedible and may weaken or kill whole canes. 
Pruning out old canes to provide good air 
circulation aids control. To prevent the disease, 
apply sulfur dusts. To control existing infection, 
apply lime-sulfur spray. Resistant cultivars
including 'M eeker. ‘Sumner, and ‘Willamette*.
Fruit of red raspberries small and crumbly.
Cause: Crumbly berry virus. This disease is 
incurable. Digout and destroy infected plants 
and replant at a new site with virus-free (also 
called virus-indexed) plants.
Fruit small, tasteless, and dry. Cause: 
Verticillium wilt. For more information, see 
‘‘New canes die in midsummer** on page 199. 
Drought can also cause these symptoms.
Fruit infested with slender white grubs. 
Cause: Raspberry fruitworms. These 'A" lar­
vae feed in ripening fruit and may cause ber­
ries to drop prematurely. Adults are 5/»", brown 
beetles that feed on flowers and leaves before 
laying eggs on fruit. Collect and destroy 
worm-infested fruit to prevent larvae from drop­
ping to the ground and overwintering. Spray 
plants with pyrethrin as blossom buds appear.

198 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
and again when flowers open, if you have had 
problems in the past.
Leaf and Branch Problems
Canes with dark blotches; sideshoots may 
wilt and canes may die. Causes: Spur blight; 
cane blight: anthracnose. Spur blight causes 
reddish brown blotches around leaf bases. This 
fungal disease appears mostly in midsummer 
on new canes of red raspberries. The follow­
ing spring, blotches will be gray and leaf buds 
of affected cane areas will be dead. Sideshoots 
may wilt and entire canes may die. For 
prevention, plant resistant cultivars. includ­
ing Boyne, ‘Festival*,‘Haida*,and ‘Newburgh*.
Cane blight causes canes with large, brown­
ish purple areas extending over several buds. 
This fungal disease, most common on black 
raspberries, usually enters through a wound. 
Sideshoots may wilt and entire canes may die.
Anthracnose causes canes and leaves with 
gray spots surrounded by red or purple margins. 
Infected leaves have small yellowish white 
spots, the centers of which may dry and fall out. 
Sideshoots may wilt and entire canes may die. 
To help prevent this fungal disease, plant 
anthracnose-resistant cultivars, including ‘Black 
Hawk*. ‘Jewel’, ‘Lowden, Mac Black,* and 
‘Munger*. See page 197 for an illustration of 
this disease.
To control all 3 of these diseases, also use 
cultivation methods that help prevent fungal 
infections. Maintain good air circulation by 
selecting a sunny, well-drained site. Each fall, 
remove diseased or crowded canes at ground 
level. Prune when plants are dry and rain is 
not expected for the next 3 days. For persis­
tent fungal infection, apply lime-sulfur spray 
just as leaf buds break in the spring.
Leaves lightly stippled, curled, and dry. 
Cause: Mites. Tap a leaf over a sheet of white 
paper. Mites will appear on the paper as mov­
ing red, green, or yellow specks. Mites are
most prevalent under dusty conditions and on 
water-stressed plants. For prevention, keep 
plants mulched and well-watered. For light 
infestations, spray plants with water: for heavy 
infestations, spray with insecticidal soap. Lime- 
sulfur spray applied early in the growing sea­
son also aids control. Mites are controlled by 
natural enemies, including predatory mites. If 
simple controls don’t work, you can purchase 
predatory mites from insectaries or organic 
farm and garden supply catalogs.
Leaves and growing tips of canes covered 
with powdery white coating. Cause: Powdery 
mildew. For more information, see ‘ Fruit cov­
ered with a powdery white coating** on page 197.
Leaves with greenish black spots that later 
turn gray. Cause: Raspberry leaf spot. This 
fungal disease may cause leaf spots to develop 
holes and leaves to drop early. Good air circu­
lation aids prevention. Choose a sunny, well- 
drained planting site and thin plantings each 
fall or winter to prevent overcrowding of canes. 
For persistent infection, apply lime-sulfur spray 
just as leaf buds begin to green in the spring.
I>eaf undersides with bright orange pustules. 
Cause: Orange rust. This incurable fungal dis­
ease appears only on black or purple rasp­
berries, and blackberries. Diseased plants never 
recover: infection spreads quickly to neigh­
boring plants. Dig up and destroy plants as 
soon as you notice disease symptoms. Install 
new plantings well away from wild brambles, 
which are a source of infection.
Leaves skeletonized. Causes: Raspberry 
sawfly larvae: Japanese beetles; raspberry 
fruitworm beetles. The prickly, pale green.
larvae of raspberry sawflies usually clus­
ter on leaf undersides. They feed on leaves for 
up to 2 weeks before descending to the ground, 
where they pupate and emerge the following 
spring as adult sawflies. For heavy infestations, 
handpick larvae or spray with BTK. Or apply 
pyrethrin sprays.
Japanese beetles are xh '\ metallic blue-

RASPBERRY ■ 
199
green insects with bronze wing covers. For 
light infestations, check plants in the morning 
while beetles are sluggish and knock them off 
leaves into jars filled with soapy water. Traps 
baited with floral or fruit scents may reduce 
damage if placed at some distance from plants. 
Some gardeners find that these traps attract 
additional beetles into the garden, so be sure 
to place traps well away from plantings you 
wish to protect. Japanese beetle populations 
naturally decline by midsummer, but for heavy 
infestations, spray with neem as a last resort.
Milky disease spores, available commer­
cially and applied to lawns to control Japan­
ese beetle grubs, is a traditional control that 
works in some gardens and not in others. The 
disease does not always infect the entire grub 
population, and beetles that emerge from neigh­
boring properties may fly to your plants.
If Japanese beetles are a consistent prob­
lem in your area, avoid planting raspberry 
cultivars particularly attractive to these pests. 
Cultivars to avoid include ‘Fall Gold', ‘Festival', 
‘Heritage*, ‘Latham*, ‘Newburgh*. ‘Reveille*, 
‘Ruby*, and ‘Skeena'. In the future, gardeners 
may be able to buy parasitic nematodes that 
can be applied to the soil to control the grub 
stage of this pest.
Raspberry fruitworm beetles also chew 
leaves into a lacy pattern. For more informa­
tion, see ‘‘Fruit infested with slender white 
grubs'* on page 197.
Whole Plant Problems
New canes die in midsummer. Cause: 
Verticillium wilt. Typically leaves yellow, wilt, 
and fall before the entire cane dies. There is 
no cure for this soilborne fungal disease, which 
may be carried by other host plants such as 
tomatoes, potatoes, peppers, or eggplants. Avoid 
planting raspberries where other Verticillium 
host plants formerly grew. For extra precaution, 
solarize the soil to kill the fungus before plant­
ing (see “Soil Solarization” on page 424). See
page 197 for an illustration of this disease.
Canes with wartlike or corky swellings; 
canes dying. Cause: Crown gall. Look for 
irregular corky swellings on the roots and crown 
area as well as the canes. Crown gall bacteria 
live in the soil and enter plants through wounds, 
so avoid injury to roots or crowns of plants. 
When working with infected plants, use iso­
propyl alcohol or a 10 percent bleach solution 
(1 part bleach to 9 parts water) to disinfect 
shovels and other tools before you move from 
one plant to the next.
Avoid introducing the infection into your 
soil by planting only healthy stock from a 
reputable grower. Many different types of plants 
are susceptible to crown gall, including roses, 
melons, and chrysanthemums. If your soil is 
infected, don't plant susceptible plants on that 
site for at least 3 years. If you must plant 
raspberries in soil with a history of crown gall, 
pretreat plants with the biological control agent 
Galltrol-A. The cultivar ‘Willamette' has some 
crown gall resistance.
Canes dying, break off easily. Cause: Rasp­
berry crown borers. The adult form of this 
insect, a clear-winged moth, lays eggs at cane 
bases. Eggs hatch into white, xh" grubs that 
feed on crowns, roots, and cane bases. Heav­
ily infested canes may be hollowed out entirely. 
Dig out and destroy infested crowns. Vigor­
ous canes are less likely to be attacked.
Cane tips wilted and dying. Causes: 
Rednecked cane borers; raspberry cane bor­
ers; raspberry homtails. All 3 of these insects 
lay eggs near cane tops, causing tips to wilt 
and die. Gall-like, cigar-shaped swellings on 
canes indicate rednecked cane borers. Canes 
girdled with spiral-shaped galls have been 
attacked by homtails. In all 3 cases, the adult 
insect lays eggs in the canes. Eggs hatch into 
grubs that feed and overwinter inside canes. 
For control, prune out and destroy infected 
canes as soon as you notice the injury. For 
heavy infestations, apply pyrethrin just before

200 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
plants come into bloom. See page 197 for an 
illustration of the rednecked cane borer.
Leaves mottled with irregular yellow spots. 
Cause: Mosaic virus. This disease is transmit­
ted by aphids and appears only on black or 
purple raspberries. Red raspberries may carry 
the virus but will show no symptoms. Infected 
purple or black raspberries eventually become 
stunted and develop small, misshapen leaves 
with green blisters. The only control is to dig 
up infected plants and replant with virus-free 
(also called virus-indexed) stock. Also avoid 
planting raspberries in sites near wild or old, 
neglected raspberries. Since red raspberries 
may carry the disease, keep plantings of black 
and purple raspberries separate from red 
raspberries. ‘Royalty’ purple raspberry is less 
susceptible to mosaic than other purple rasp­
berries because it is seldom infested with the 
species of aphid that transmits the disease.
Rhododendron
Rhododendron, azalea. Shrubs.
Rhododendrons and azaleas, both mem­
bers of the genus Rhododendron, are deciduous, 
semi-evergreen, or evergreen, broad-leaved 
shrubs. Rhododendron leaves are usually large 
and evergreen, while azalea leaves are gener­
ally small and deciduous. Gardeners prize 
both for the colorful flowers. Best adapted to 
cool, moist climates, they are commonly used 
in foundation and woodland plantings.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
or container-grown plants. Sun or partial shade 
suits them well; the further south, the more 
shade they need. Rhododendrons and azaleas 
require cool, moist, highly organic, acid soil. 
Choose a site where they won’t be exposed to 
hot summer or drying winter winds. Their
feeding roots are close to the surface, so be 
sure to set out plants at the same level at 
which they were growing in the nursery.
Cultivation can damage the shallow roots, 
so apply a thick layer of organic mulch to help 
keep down weeds and maintain a cool, moist 
root zone. Rhododendrons and azaleas don’t 
tolerate drought, so take care to water them 
thoroughly during dry spells. Some azaleas 
may be damaged by insecticidal soap sprays, 
so test the product on a few leaves before 
spraying the whole plant.
Problems
Leaves mottled, with shiny, black flecks 
underneath. Cause: Lace bugs. These pests 
are most common on plants growing in full 
sun. Adults are 
flattened, dark insects 
with lacy-patterned, silvery white wings. Both 
adults and the tiny nymphs feed on the under­
sides of leaves, sucking the sap and producing 
a gray, splotched or stippled appearance to 
the upper sides of the foliage. The undersides 
of the leaves are spotted with tiny dots of 
brown excrement. For an illustration of this 
pest and the damage it causes, see the oppo­
site page.
At the first sign of damage, spray with 
insecticidal soap, paying particular attention 
to the undersides of the leaves; test soap on 
azaleas before spraying. Repeat the applica­
tion if pests reappear in mid- to late summer. 
For severe infestations, spray with superior 
oil, or pyrethrin as a last resort.
Leaves with notched edges. Cause: Black 
vine weevils. The w in g le ss,b ro w n ish  black 
adults feed on the leaves and bark and can kill 
branches. See the opposite page for an illus­
tration of this pest. To control them, try spread­
ing a dropcloth around your plants, then shaking 
the plants; the adults will drop and can be 
removed and destroyed. Spray leaves several 
times with pyrethrin for major infestations. 
The small, curved, white grubs of these wee­
vils feed on the roots; drench the soil around

RHODODENDRON 
■ 
201
Nymph
Aduit
Leaves m ottled, with shiny, 
black flecks underneath.
m  ■ftC au se  Lace bugs. Azaleas
^fcnd rhododendrons jrowing in full sun 
are most often 
attacked.
sw ith pinhead-sizespots; 
m s rot. Cause: Flower petal 
blight. Afflicted petals feel 
slimy; blighted flowers 
|  
> ^ ^ l r y  and cling to plants. ^
t r  
-**•
Leaves w ith spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
Several species of fungi 
cause leaf spots on 
rhododendrons
and azaleas. 
. 
a S B r  '
S tem  tip s die; leaves brown 
and wilt. Cause: Dieback. 
f la n k e r s  girdle twig tips; 
dead leaves cling to 
^ p la n t stems shrivel.
Adult
Adult
Larva
Larva
/i* wingspan
Leaves yellow and wilt; branches break off.
Cause: Rhododendron borers. Pests bore into 
trunk, branches; look for small holes and
Leaves w ith notched edges.
Cause: B ack vine weevils.
Adults feed on leaves at night: 
larvae ea roots, causing top of plant
RHODODENDRON ♦ Wh^ndWhvr°n8
Copyrighted material

202 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
the base of the plant with a solution of para­
sitic nematodes for control.
Leaves yellow and wilt; branches break 
off. Cause: Rhododendron borers. These 
small, clear-winged, wasplike moths lay eggs 
on leaves, twigs, and bark. The eggs hatch 
into 
whitish larvae that burrow into and 
weaken stems and branches. For an illustra­
tion of the pest and its damage, see page 201. 
Control borers by pruning and destroying 
affected branches. Seal the cut branches with 
putty or grafting wax. Water and fertilize the 
plant to help it recover quickly.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
Several kinds of fungi cause spots on azalea 
and rhododendron leaves. For an illustration 
of this problem, see page 201. For control mea­
sures, see “Leaves with spots” on page 237.
Petals with pinhead-size spots; blooms rot. 
Cause: Flower petal blight. For an illustration 
of this problem, see page 201. Remove and 
destroy infected flowers and branch tips. Rake 
debris from around the base of the plant and 
replace with fresh mulch.
Stem tips die; leaves brown and wilt. 
Cause: Dieback. For an illustration of this 
problem, see page 201. Besides causing leaves 
to brown, roll, and wilt, dieback may kill stem 
tips and cause cankers to form on stems. Avoid 
dieback by keeping plants healthy, with regu­
lar watering and good winter protection. Prune 
out diseased tips several inches below the dam­
aged areas. Spray the plant with bordeaux mix 
after the plant blooms, and again 10 days later.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. Fbr controls, 
see "Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps.” on page 237.
Leaves yellowed. Cause: High soil pH. 
Chlorosis (yellowed leaves) is most common 
on azaleas and rhododendrons used in foun­
dation plantings. Lime leaches from the foun­
dation of the house, making the soil too alkaline. 
Restore soil acidity by applying 2-3 pounds of 
sulfur per 100 square feet of growing area;
scratch it lightly into the soil. Mulching with 
evergreen needles or chopped leaves will help 
maintain the proper pH.
Leaves mottled yellow. Cause: Whiteflies. 
These tiny, white, mothlike insects and their 
even smaller larvae feed on the undersides of 
leaves, weakening the plant. Spray leaves (make 
sure you get the undersides, too!) with insecti­
cidal soap, or pyrethrin as a last resort; repeat 
weekly until pests are under control. Test soap 
on azaleas before spraying.
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. See 
"Leaves tunneled” on page 237 for controls.
Leaves with green, white, or brown galls. 
Cause: Azalea leaf gall. This fungal leaf gall 
attacks both azaleas and rhododendrons. Pick 
off and destroy infected leaves as soon as you 
spot the galls.
Rhubarb
Rheum rhabarbarum (Polygonaceae)
Rhubarb is a hardy perennial grown for 
its red or green leaf stalks that are sweetened 
and used in pies, or stewed. Rhubarb leaves 
contain toxic quantities of oxalic acid. Don’t 
eat them: Trim them off harvested stalks and 
compost them.
Culture
Rhubarb grows best in areas with cool, 
moist summers and requires a winter cold 
enough to freeze the top few inches of soil and 
induce a dormancy period. Choose a weed- 
free location with deep, sandy (if you have it), 
well-drained soil, with lots of organic matter. 
Rhubarb grows best with a pH between 6.0 
and 6.8. It is a heavy feeder and will not 
produce large stalks if underfertilized. Work 
in plenty of compost before planting and mulch 
with several inches of a high-nitrogen com­

ROSA 
■ 
203
post each spring. Mix compost with a high* 
nitrogen supplement such as blood meal or 
soybean meal to boost its nitrogen content.
Most disease problems can be avoided 
with proper culture. Do not plant in wet or 
clayey soils. Use disease-free crowns and soak 
them in compost tea for 5 minutes before 
planting. Dispose of dead leaves in the fall to 
prevent pests and diseases from overwintering.
Do not harvest new plantings for at least
2 years. When you do start to harvest, choose 
only thick stalks and let the thin stalks feed 
the roots for the following year. Harvest for 
only 5-7 weeks, then stop so that plants can 
store energy for the next season. Cut out 
seed stalks as soon as they form to prevent 
them from using the plant's energy.
Problems
Stalks thin and small; leaves yellow.
Causes: Young plants; overharvested plants; 
nutrient deficiency; overcrowding; crown or 
foot rot; waterlogged soil. Spray young plants 
with fish-meal tea to promote strong early 
growth. Follow the information under “Cul­
ture" above to prevent overharvesting or nutri­
ent deficiency.
Rhubarb roots spread vigorously and need 
to be divided every 5 years or so. As plants 
become crowded, they produce thinner and 
thinner stalks.
If the roots or crown are also soft and 
rotted, the plant is suffering from crown or 
foot rot. Destroy plants infected with these 
fungal diseases. Prevent both diseases by plant­
ing in raised beds or hills.
Waterlogged soil will produce the same 
symptoms. Do not let soil get saturated; plant 
in raised beds.
Leaves yellow; stalks collapse. Causes: 
Verticillium wilt; crown or foot rot. Destroy 
dying leaves and plants suffering from these 
fungal diseases. Do not plant rhubarb where 
any Verticillium-susceptible crops have grown 
within the last 3-5 years. Prevent fungal dis­
ease problems by planting in raised beds.
Leaves yellow with curled margins; plant 
wilted. Cause: Leafhoppers. These green or 
brown, spindle-shaped, Vio'-'A* long insects 
suck plant sap. Spray plants with insecticidal 
soap in the evening to control mild infestations. 
Treat plants with a commercial pyrethrin spray 
or dust if infestation is severe.
Leaves with small, round, brown spots. 
Cause: Leaf spots. Fungal leaf spots rarely re­
duce yields. Destroy diseased leaves after har­
vest. Spray plants with sulfur if disease is severe.
Stalks with soft, watery areas. Cause: 
Anthracnose. Leaves wilt and die. Destroy 
diseased stalks. Follow recommendations under 
“Culture" above to prevent this fungal disease.
Stalks with small, dark spots or bored holes. 
Cause: Rhubarb curculios. These yellowish 
gray, powder-covered, 'ti'-W  snout beetles 
damage stalks by boring holes in which to lay 
eggs. Handpick adults. Eliminate dock plants 
from weedy areas; curculios feed on it.
Stalks with brown, sunken spots at base. 
Cause: Crown or foot rot. Destroy plants 
infected with these fungal diseases. Prevent 
both by planting in raised beds or hills.
Stalks and/or leaves with chewed holes. 
Causes: Caterpillars; Japanese beetles. Ignore 
damage unless it is severe. Handpick insects. 
Spray plants with BTK if caterpillars are feeding. 
Protect plants with row cover early in the 
spring if caterpillars or beetles have been a 
problem in the past.
Rosa
Rose. Shrubs.
Roses are flowering shrubs with compound 
leaves, usually thorny stems, and flowers in a 
wide range of forms, colors, and fragrances.

204 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GLIDE
What Goes Wrong 
and Whv
(Rosa spp.)
Leaves and stems 
with black spots. ^
Cause: Black spot, a 
Infected leaves 
turn yellow; 
plant defoliated, 
w .
Maggot 
. 
to 1
Flower buds 
and new s h o o ts'! 
deform ed or dead.
Cause: Rose midges. | 
fejB Tiny larvae feed on.1 
M * buds and tendgjyt, 
new shooys. f i .
Adult
Leaves skeletonized; 
flowers eaten. Cause: Rose chafers. 
Small beetles eat foliage and especial
A d uit
^
 v
Leaves w ith TO 
powdery w hite coating.
■* 
Cause Powdery mildew. Also 
. 
attacks buds, causing
deformed blooms; 
plant weakens.
Leaf undersides with powdery 
orange pustules. Cause: Rust. 
Orange or brown spots appear 
on lower leaves first.
Leaves 
wrinkled and 
discolored.
Cause: Aphids. Pests A s  
cluster on leaves, buds, 
shoot tips; excrete sticky 
v 
honeydew that fosters the growth' V  
of black, sooty mold.
Adult
Flowers 
fall to open;
p etals w ith holes. 
Cause: Rose curculios. A d u lts.^, 
eat holes in stems, flower buds; $* f 
larvae feed and overwinter in 
rose hips (fruit).
Adult
Leaves 
skeletonized; 
buds and 
flowers damaged.
Cause: Japanese beetles. 
Large beetles with 
copper-colored wing covers 
gather on plant in large numbers.

ROSA 
■ 
205
Most species are deciduous; there are a few 
evergreen or semi-evergreen species. In many 
instances their attractive fruit offers fall and 
winter interest.
Use roses in the shrub border, in small 
groups for landscape emphasis, or as single 
specimens. Climbers can be grown against 
walls, on trellises and arbors, on fences, or 
even trained up small trees. Hybrid teas, flori- 
bundas, and grandifloras, because they are so 
demanding in the care they require, are gener­
ally grown in beds devoted to roses alone; 
ironically, this massing contributes to some of 
the diseases to which they are prone. They 
also are effectively grown in large containers.
Culture
Set out roses in late winter or spring as 
bare-root or container-grown plants. They grow 
best in full sun (at least 6 hours per day) and a 
deep, rich, well-drained soil high in organic 
matter. Roses tend to do better in loamy or 
clayey, rather than sandy, soils. Allow plenty 
of room between plants for good air circulation.
In planting the modern hybrids, particu­
lar attention should be paid to the bud union 
(the knob where the graft is made). In severe 
climates, set the bud union 2" below the soil 
surface; in moderate climates, even with the 
soil surface; and in frost-free or nearly frost- 
free areas, set the bud union 2” above the soil 
surface. Roses are heavy feeders, so fertilize 
liberally. Don’t feed after midsummer, though, 
or the plant may produce soft growth that will 
be subject to winter damage.
Problems
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. Several kinds of aphids attack roses, 
often congregating on the stem tips just below 
the buds. Their feeding damages leaves and 
buds. See the opposite page for an illustration 
of the pests and their damage. For controls, see 
“Leaves wrinkled and discolored" on page 235.
Leaves skeletonized; buds and flowers 
damaged. Causes: Japanese beetles; sawflies; 
bristly rose slugs. Japanese beetle is an all- 
too-familiar pest of roses in the Northeast, 
attacking leaves, buds, and flowers. For an 
illustration of the pest and its damage, see the 
opposite page. For controls, see “Leaves skele­
tonized” on page 236.
Rose sawfly, curled rose sawfly, and, most 
important, bristly rose slug, have sluglike lar­
vae that skeletonize foliage. They are espe­
cially destructive early in the growing season. 
Spray leaves with insecticidal soap, or dust 
with pyrethrin to control severe infestations. 
Handpicking is effective, but be sure to wear 
gloves; handling these pests can severely irri­
tate your skin.
Leaves and stems with black spots. Cause: 
Black spot. While most of the species and 
shrub roses are little troubled by diseases, 
such is not the case with hybrid teas, floribundas, 
and grandifloras. The most serious disease is 
black spot, caused by a fungus. Black spots 
appear on the leaves, surrounded by yellow 
patches. The disease, prevalent throughout 
the country, is most likely to occur under 
warm, moist conditions. Left unchecked, the 
plant may become entirely defoliated. For an 
illustration of the damage, see the opposite page.
To some extent, a mulch will prevent the 
spores from splashing up from the ground 
onto the leaves during rains; pick off and 
destroy all diseased leaves and clean up all 
fallen ones. If possible, avoid wetting the leaves 
when watering; otherwise, water early in the 
day so the leaves can dry by evening. A 0.5 
percent solution of baking soda may help con­
trol blackspot. Dissolve 1 teaspoon of baking 
soda in 1 quart of water; spray infected plants 
thoroughly. For severe infections, the recom­
mended control is weekly applications of sulfur.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. This is a common 
and serious disease of roses. A grayish white

206 
■ 
PROBU-MSOIVING PIANT GUIDE
powdery deposit forms, first on young leaves, 
then spreading to the older ones and buds, and 
even sometimes to the canes. See page 204 
for an illustration of the damage. At the first 
sign of the disease, pick off affected parts: com­
mence a weekly spraying program with sulfur.
Flower buds fail to open. Cause: Thrips. 
When flower buds have brown edges and fail 
to open, thrips may be at work. They may also 
cause spots or streaks on open blooms. These 
pests are tiny, slender, light brown, fast-moving 
insects. A number of natural predators nor­
mally help keep them in check. If damage is 
severe, spray weekly with insecticidal soap, or 
pyrethrin if necessary.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. For control measures, 
see “Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage 
webbed" on page 236.
Canes with discolored or dead areas. Cause: 
Cankers. A number of fungal cankers attack 
roses. Pruning off and destroying diseased canes 
is the best approach to this problem.
Leaf undersides with powdery orange 
pustules. Cause: Rust. In the western United 
States, rust causes reddish orange bubbles to 
appear on the undersides of the leaves. Later, 
they spread to the upper surfaces. See page 
204 for an illustration of the damage. Pick off 
and destroy infected leaves; in areas where 
the disease is common, start a spraying pro­
gram early in the spring with weekly applica­
tions of sulfur.
leaves with yellow-green mottling. Cause: 
Viral diseases. Besides discoloring leaves, 
viruses may also stunt the plant’s growth. A 
number of insects spread viruses as they feed, 
so keeping insect pests under control will reduce 
the chances of viral problems. Destroy infected 
plants immediately.
Leaves skeletonized; flowers eaten. Cause: 
Rose chafers. Rose chafers, also known as 
rose bugs, skeletonize foliage and damage
flowers. For an illustration of the pest and the 
damage it causes, see page 204. This ‘A'\ red­
dish brown beetle appears in late spring. It is 
especially active in areas with sandy soils. 
Handpicking is the best control. Reduce pop­
ulations of larvae by treating lawn areas with 
disease spores. Spray plants with pyrethrin as 
a last resort.
Flowers tail to open; petals with holes. 
Cause: Beetles. Rose curculios are ’A". bright 
red, black-beaked insects; for an illustration, 
see page 204. Rose leaf beetles are V#", shiny, 
blue or green pests. Both of these insects bore 
into flower buds, preventing them from opening. 
If there are only a few pests, handpicking is 
the best control. Remove and destroy infested 
buds. For severe infestations, spray leaves and 
buds with pyrethrin.
Flower buds and new shoots deformed or 
dead. Cause: Rose midges. The white larvae 
of this tiny yellow-brown insect feed on flower 
buds and tender shoot growth, causing the 
injured parts to turn brown and die. See page 
204 for an illustration of this pest and its damage. 
Cut off and destroy all infested buds to reduce 
future damage.
Shoot tips wilted; leaves with large holes. 
Cause: Leafcutter bees. Cleanly cut holes in 
the leaves, either round or oval, suggest the 
activity of leafcutter bees. After damaging the 
leaves, these pests bore into canes to lay their 
eggs, causing the shoots to wilt. Control by 
pruning out the injured tips several inches 
below the damaged area. Seal the cut end of 
the cane with grafting wax or putty.
Shoot tips die back; canes swollen or with 
small holes. Cause: Stem girdlers and borers. 
Rose stem girdler causes spiral swellings in 
the bark; raspberry cane borer causes the tips 
to die back: and rednecked cane borer and 
flatheaded appletree borer burrow in the canes. 
Cut off and destroy all dead and dying wood.
Leaves stippled with white. Cause: Leaf-

RUDBECK1A 
■ 
207
hoppers. Foliage whitened or stippled indicates 
leafhopper activity. These lively, '/w"-1/*", green 
or brown, wedge-shaped insects hop around, 
sucking the juices from the leaves and serving 
as the vectors for several viral diseases. Spraying 
with insecticidal soap usually will control them: 
repeat as necessary. To control serious infesta­
tions, spray with pyrethrin.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. For controls, 
see "Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps” on page 237.
Buds fail to open, turn brown. Cause: 
Botrytis blight. Should the buds on your roses 
turn brown and decay instead of opening 
normally, it may indicate a fungal blight. Pick 
off and destroy diseased blooms; spray plants 
weekly with sulfur.
Leaves skeletonized or with large boles; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
See "Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed" on page 236 for 
controls.
Trunk or roots with swollen, wartlike 
growths. Cause: Crown gall. For more infor­
mation, see “Trunk or roots with swollen, 
wartlike growths” on page 238.
Rosemary
Rosmarinus officinalis (Labiatae)
Rosemary is a half-hardy (Zone 8) peren­
nial commonly grown for its aromatic, needle­
like leaves. This herb also bears attractive 
white, pink, or pale or dark blue flowers. In 
the South, rosemary is an evergreen shrub
that can grow 3"-6' tall. In the North, grow 
it in pots and move it indoors during the win­
ter. Start rosemary from cuttings or purchase 
plants. Seedlings grow very slowly. Rosemary 
does best in full sun with very well drained soil 
and a pH between 6.0 and 8.2. Keep the soil 
evenly moist.
Rosemary has very few problems except 
root rot and powdery mildew. Avoid root rot 
by being careful not to overwater. When plant­
ing in containers, choose a very porous pot­
ting mix. See “Leaves yellow; plant wilts; stems, 
crowns, or roots water-soaked and rotted” on 
page 117 for additional controls. Powdery mil­
dew can cause fuzzy white growth on leaves 
and stems. Spray affected plants repeatedly 
with compost tea for control.
Rudbeckia
Coneflower, black-eyed Susan. Perennials.
Cheery, daisylike coneflowers provide 
masses of warm yellow, gold, or orange blos­
soms from summer up until frost. A dozen or 
so slightly droopy petals—actually ray flowers— 
surround the rounded, raised, dark brown or 
greenish center that gives black-eyed Susan 
(Rudbeckia hirta) its name. Plants range from 
IW  to 6' tall with rather coarse, toothed, dark 
green foliage.
Plant coneflowers in full sun to partial 
shade in average, well-drained soil. Plants are 
hardy and moderately tolerant of drought; 
excess moisture promotes fungal diseases. Cone­
flowers self-sow but are not invasive. Divide 
clumps every 4-5 years to maintain vigorous, 
trouble-free plantings.

208 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Sage
Salvia officinalis (Labiatae)
Sage is a hardy (Zone 5) perennial herb 
grown for its pleasantly bitter-tasting leaves. 
Start sage from cuttings or purchased plants, 
as seedlings are quite variable. It does best in 
moderately rich, well-drained soil with a pH 
between 5.0 and 8.0, and at least 4 hours of 
sun per day.
Sage is normally quite trouble-free. Aster 
yellows can cause dwarfed, abnormally col­
ored leaves and bushy growth. Destroy infected 
plants, and control leafhoppers and other suck­
ing insects that spread diseases. Tan or red 
blisters on leaves are caused by rust. Destroy 
infected leaves and avoid wetting leaves to 
prevent its spread. See the Herbs entry begin­
ning on page 116 for other possible problems.
Salix
Willow. TVees and shrubs.
Willows are deciduous trees and shrubs 
with simple, alternate leaves. The tree-forming 
species are principally valued for their grace­
ful, pendulous form; among the shrubs, the 
immature catkins are valued for cutting and 
forcing.
Willows love moisture and have questing 
roots that can invade drains and water pipes. 
Take care not to locate willows near such 
structures. Set willows out in spring or fall, in 
moist (even swampy) soil with sun or light 
shade.
Problems
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
For controls, see “Leaves skeletonized or with 
large holes; branches may be webbed” and 
"Plant defoliated” on page 236.
Leaves skeletonized. Causes: Japanese 
beetles; imported willow leaf beetles. Japan­
ese beetles are xh n long, with metallic blue- 
green bodies and bronze wing covers. Adult 
imported willow leaf beetles are '/<•" long, with 
shiny, blue-black wings. Their ’A” larvae, which 
also feed on leaves, are black and sluglike. 
For Japanese beetle controls, see "Leaves 
skeletonized" on page 236. Attract beneficial 
insects to your garden to help control leaf 
beetles; as a last resort, dust small plants with 
pyrethrin.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. See “Trunk 
or branches with small holes; limbs die or 
break off* on page 238 for controls.
Copyrighted material

SEDUM 
■ 
209
Leaves with brown blotches or tiny holes; 
shoot tips damaged. Cause: Willow flea weevils. 
The tiny black adult weevils overwinter in 
debris on the ground, feed on shoot tips in late 
spring, and lay eggs on leaves. The larvae 
emerge in early summer and feed by tunnel­
ing within the leaves. The pests come out of 
the leaves as adults and chew small holes in 
leaves until winter. On small plants, control 
willow flea weevils in the adult stage (spring 
or fall) by spraying or dusting leaves with pyre- 
thrin as a last resort.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Causes: 
Aphids: willow lace bugs. See “Leaves wrin­
kled and discolored” on page 235 for more 
information on aphids.
Willow lace bug adults and larvae also 
feed on willow leaves, causing severe discolor­
ation. These x/*w-lh n pests have distinctive lacy 
wings and commonly feed on the undersides 
of leaves. Control by spraying upper and lower 
leaf surfaces with insecticidal soap.
Leaves wilted and discolored; branches die 
back. Cause: Blight. Both a bacterial and a 
fungal blight attack willows, causing similar 
symptoms. Prune out and destroy infected 
branches during the dormant season. Disinfect 
pruners after each cut in a 10 percent bleach 
solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts water). In 
spring, spray twice with bordeaux mix at 10- 
day intervals, starting when the leaves first 
unfold.
Trunk or roots with swollen, wartlike 
growths. Cause: Crown gall. For more 
information, see “Trunk or roots with swollen, 
wartlike growths” on page 238.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
“Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; branch 
tips die back” on page 238 for details.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237.
Salvia
Sage, salvia. Perennials.
This genus of the mint family contains 
hundreds of perennial and annual species grown 
for flowers, foliage, and herbal uses. Tubular 
flowers are carried on upright spikes over bushy, 
smooth to densely hairy, and often fragrant 
foliage. Red-flowered plants, such as scarlet 
sage (Salvia splendens), are often annuals or 
tender perennials, while most perennial species, 
including garden sage (5. officinalis), flow­
er in shades of blue or purple. Silver sage 
(5. argentea) bears unimpressive white flowers 
that pale next to the large, crinkly, woolly 
leaves. Plants grow from 1' to 4' tall with sim­
ilar spread.
Grow sages in full sun or light shade in 
average, well-drained soil. Some species toler­
ate heat and drought, but most flower more 
freely if kept evenly watered. Very hot weather 
may interrupt blooming, even if plants are 
well-tended. A summer mulch helps retain 
moisture in the soil and keep roots cool. In 
areas where temperatures fall below 0°F pro­
tect perennial species by applying a winter 
mulch after the soil freezes. Remove faded 
flower spikes to encourage branching. Few pests 
or diseases cause significant damage to sages.
Sedum
Sedum, stonecrop. Perennials.
Hundreds of species of durable, succu­
lent plants make up this genus. Some are low- 
growing creepers that spread vigorously, even

210 ■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING P1ANT GUIDE
in the poorest of soils, while others form 2' 
tall, upright clumps. Light green, fleshy leaves 
tinged with white, red, or bronze in some 
species, may upstage the blooms; however, 
showy yellow, pink, or red flowers are the 
hallmark of sedums such as showy stonecrop 
(Sedum spectabile) and hybrid ‘Autumn Joy’, 
which bear profuse, flattened clusters of blooms. 
Flowering occurs from spring through summer, 
depending on the species.
Favored as rock garden plants, sedums 
endure poor, dry soil, but perform well in 
most well-drained soils. Full sun is best; sedums 
tolerate some shade, but resulting stems will 
be weaker. Although drought-tolerant, sedums 
bloom better if watered regularly. Excess mois­
ture encourages rots, especially in winter. Sedum 
stems and leaves form roots readily.
Sedums are relatively untroubled by pests 
and diseases; the ease with which new plants 
are propagated reduces the likelihood that 
problems will decimate a planting. Aphids are 
occasionally troublesome; see “Leaves, stems, 
and buds distorted, sticky; clusters of small 
insects” on page 177 for control information.
Senecio
Dusty miller. 
Tender perennials grown as annuals.
Although they sometimes bear 1", yellow 
flowers, dusty millers are generally grown for 
their foliage. The lacy leaves of the plant are 
covered with white hairs, giving the foliage a 
silvery appearance. Plants grow 172-2' tall. 
Dusty millers are ideal for edging beds and 
borders, or in window boxes.
Sow seeds indoors in late winter. Don’t 
cover seeds; they need light to germinate.
Seedlings appear in 10 days. Because seed­
lings develop slowly, some gardeners prefer to 
start with nursery-grown plants. Set out after 
the last frost, 8"-10" apart.
Dusty millers grow best in full sun with 
average to fertile, well-drained soil. Pinch off 
flower heads as they appear. Few pests or 
diseases bother dusty millers.
Sorbus
Mountain ash. Trees.
Mountain ashes are fast-growing, alternate- 
leaved, deciduous trees grown principally for 
the profuse clusters of white flowers that are 
followed by brightly colored fruit in autumn. 
Although rather weak-wooded and very sub­
ject to pests and diseases, they are popular as 
ornamental specimen trees.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
plants. Mountain ashes need sun and a slightly 
acidic, well-drained location. They are rather 
intolerant of the air pollution common to cities. 
Mountain ashes are best adapted to northern 
gardens; high summer temperatures stress the 
plant and make it more susceptible to problems.
Problems
Leaves, flowers, and branches blackened.
Cause: Fire blight. For more information and 
controls, see “Leaves, flowers, and branches 
blackened” on page 192.
Leaves skeletonized. Causes: Japanese 
beetles; sawflies. For controls, see “Leaves 
skeletonized” on page 236.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
‘Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; branch 
tips die back” on page 238 for details.

SPINACH ■ 211
Leaves distorted, orange-yellow spots on 
leaf undersides. Cause: Rust. See “Leaves 
distorted, orange-yellow spots on leaf under­
sides” on page 99.
Leaves and berries with black, scabby areas. 
Cause: Scab. Infected leaves eventually turn 
yellow and brown before falling off the plant. 
Damaged fruit is unsightly. Clean up fallen 
leaves and berries. The following year, spray 
plants twice, 2 weeks apart, with bordeaux 
mix.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves wrinkled and discolored” 
on page 235 for controls.
Trunk or roots with swollen, wartlike 
growths. Cause: Crown gall. See “Trunk or 
roots with swollen, wartlike growths” on page 
238 for more information.
Leaves with brownish blisters underneath. 
Cause: Pear leaf blister mites. These micro­
scopic mites live and feed on tissue inside 
leaves. They overwinter on buds and infest 
new leaves in spring. Spray plants in late win­
ter with dormant oil or lime-sulfur.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. See “Trunk 
or branches with small holes; limbs die or 
break off” on page 238 for controls.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237 for more information.
Spinach
Spinacia oleracea (Chenopodiaceae)
Spinach is a cool-season annual vegeta­
ble grown for its tender, green leaves. It can be 
grown in the spring or fall, and may even
survive over winter. Cultivars come in 2 types: 
savoy-leaved (crinkled) and flat-leaved.
Culture
Grow spinach in well-drained soil with 
lots of organic matter and a pH between 6.0 
and 7.0. Spinach seed germinates best at soil 
temperatures between 45° and 75°F; but will 
germinate as low as 35°H Mature spinach can 
survive tem peratures of 20°F if gradually 
hardened. However, prolonged exposure of 
young plants to temperatures below 45°F will 
cause bolting—production of a flower stalk — 
and plants will produce few, low-quality leaves. 
Temperatures above 75°F and long days also 
cause bolting. In warmer climates, plant spin­
ach in filtered shade to extend its season into 
the warmer months.
Keep soil moist, but not soggy. Do not 
allow it to dry out, or plants may bolt. Spread 
a thin layer of mulch around plants to con­
serve moisture, suppress weeds, and keep 
soil cool.
Soak seed in compost tea for 30 minutes 
before planting to speed germination, and help 
suppress soilborne diseases.
Spinach requires moderate levels of potas­
sium and phosphorus and high levels of nitrogen. 
It is also sensitive to low levels of calcium and 
boron. Have the soil tested and amend as 
necessary. Fast-acting sources of nitrogen, such 
as bloodmeal and soybean meal, are good 
fertilizers for spinach.
Problems
Plant sends up a flower stalk. Causes: 
Extreme temperatures; long days. Prolonged 
exposure of young plants to temperatures below 
45°F causes plants to bolt, or send up a 
flower stalk at the expense of succulent leaves. 
Temperatures above 75°F and long days also 
cause bolting. Discard bolted plants. Prevent 
problems by covering plants with row cover 
until temperatures are stable and by planting

212 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
bolt-resistant cultivars. Try planting New Zea­
land spinach (Tetragonia tetragonioides) in 
the summer. Its flavor is similar to that of reg­
ular spinach, and it thrives in hot weather.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted and may be 
wilted. Causes: Nitrogen deficiency; water­
logged soil; Fusarium wilt. If leaves are pale 
or yellowish, and plants are stunted but not 
wilted, they may be suffering from nitrogen 
deficiency or waterlogged soil. Spray plants 
and drench roots with compost tea or fish­
meal tea to encourage the production of dark 
green leaves. Prevent problems by choosing 
well-drained sites, adding organic matter to 
the soil to increase fertility and improve 
drainage, and planting in raised beds.
Wilted plants have Fusarium wilt. Destroy 
infected plants. This fungal disease thrives in 
warm (70°-80°F) soil, so avoid problems by 
raising spinach while the soil is cool in spring 
or fall.
Leaves yellow and deformed. Causes: 
Aphids; curly top virus; mosaic virus. Yellow 
curled leaves and stunted growth can be caused 
by aphids. Check for these green, pink, black, 
gray, or white fluffy-coated, soft-bodied, small 
insects on the undersides of lower leaves, often 
near the leaf midrib. Spray plants, especially 
the undersides of the leaves, with water to 
discourage aphids, or with insecticidal soap if 
infestation is severe.
If young leaves are yellow, deformed, and 
stunted, the plant has curly top virus. Deformed 
leaves may die. If older leaves are also mottled, 
the plant is suffering from mosaic virus, also 
called blight or yellows. Destroy infected plants. 
Control aphids, which spread mosaic as they 
feed, and beet leafhoppers, which transmit 
curly top. Prevent some problems by planting 
m osaic-tolerant cultivars such as ‘Indian 
Summer’, ‘Melody*, and ‘Winter Bloomsdale*.
Leaves with pale yellow patches on upper 
surfaces. Causes: Downy mildew; white rust. 
If spots develop a grayish mold on the under­
sides of the leaves, they are suffering from 
downy mildew, a fungal disease. Destroy 
infected leaves or plants. Prevent problems by 
thinning plants to increase air circulation and 
by planting resistant or tolerant cultivars such 
as ‘Crystal Savoy’, ‘Fall G reen, ‘Gladiator’, 
‘Indian Summer’, ‘Kent’, ‘Melody’, ‘Olympia’, 
‘Seven R \ ‘Tyee’. and ‘Winter Bloomsdale'.
If spots develop white blisters on the under­
sides of the leaves, they have white rust, another 
fungal disease. Destroy infected leaves or plants. 
Prevent problems by thinning plants to increase 
air circulation and by planting tolerant culti­
vars such as ‘Fall Green*.
Leaves with water-soaked or brown spots. 
Causes: Anthracnose; other fungal leaf spots. 
Spots may enlarge rapidly, especially in wet 
weather. Destroy infected leaves or plants. 
Spray plants with sulfur to prevent disease 
from spreading, especially if weather is wet. 
Prevent problems by thinning plants to p ro  
vide good air movement.
Leaves with light-colored tunnels or 
blotches. Cause: Leafminers. Larvae are 
creamy white, ■/»" long maggots that feed on 
leaf tissue. Destroy mined leaves. Prevent prob­
lems by tilling soil after harvest.
Leaves with small holes. Cause: Rea 
beetles. These tiny, black, brown, or bronze 
beetles hop when disturbed. Larvae are small 
and white, feed mostly on the undersides of 
leaves, and drop to the ground and play dead 
when disturbed. Control severe infestations 
by spraying or dusting plants with pyrethrin. 
Prevent problems by covering young plants 
with row cover, which can be left on until 
harvest as long as temperatures are moderate. 
Rea beetles can also be discouraged by plant­
ing in partial shade.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Caterpillars. Various caterpillars will feed on 
spinach. Handpick, or spray plants with BTK 
if caterpillars are feeding, or protect plants 
with row cover.

SQUASH 
■ 
213
Spiraea
Spirea. Shrubs.
Spireas are alternate-leaved, deciduous 
shrubs that flower in late spring. They are best 
in shrub borders or massed on banks.
Set out in spring or fall in full sun or light 
shade. A pH below 6.5 suits spireas best, and 
ample organic matter will ensure the moisture 
they require. Make sure they are well-mulched 
and well-watered going into winter.
Problems
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. For control measures, see “Leaves 
wrinkled and discolored" on page 235.
Leaves rolled and chewed. Cause: Leaf- 
rollers. These Vi", green caterpillars with brown 
heads form small webs on shoot tips and feed 
on leaves and buds inside. Break open webs 
and handpick larvae: spray BTK at first sign 
of damage.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
For controls, see “Leaves skeletonized or with 
large holes; branches may be webbed" on 
page 236.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps" on page 237 for controls.
Leaves, flowers, and branches blackened. 
Cause: Fire blight. See “Leaves, flowers, and 
branches blackened" on page 192 for controls.
Whole plant stunted and lacking vigor. 
Cause: Nematodes. See “Whole plant stunted 
and lacking vigor" on page 239 for controls.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. For controls, see 
“Leaves with powdery white coating" on 
page 237.
Squash
Cucurbita spp. (Cucurbitaceae)
Squash are frost-tender annuals grown 
for their fleshy fruit. Summer squash, such as 
zucchini, are eaten before the seeds and rinds 
harden. Winter squash are harvested after the 
fruit is mature. The name pumpkin is used for 
some winter squash. Species include: Cucurbita 
maxima. C. mixta. C. moschata. and C. pepo.
Culture
Squash seeds need 60°Fsoil to germinate, 
so wait until warm weather to plant. Cover 
plants with floating row cover to protect them 
from insects and late cold snaps. Remove row 
cover when plants begin to flower so insects 
can pollinate the blossoms, or you will not get 
any fruit.
Squash do best in well-drained, loose- 
textured soils with lots of organic matter. They 
will grow in soils with a pH between 5.5 and 
6.8, but prefer a pH above 6.0. Squash need 
lots of water, but don't let soil become saturated. 
Prevent disease problems by keeping the leaves 
dry. Mulch squash to help conserve water. 
Black plastic is a good choice for northern 
areas, but in the extremely warm areas it can 
warm the soil too much. Organic mulches are 
good, too, but may provide shelter for pests 
like squash bugs. Foil mulches help prevent 
aphid problems. To prevent rot. support fruit 
on scraps of wood.
Rotate crops so that no member of the 
cucurbit family (cucum bers, melons, and 
squash) is grown in the same place more often 
than every 4 years.
Caution: Squash leaves are easily burned 
by insecticidal soap and copper sprays. Use 
the most dilute spray recommended and use 
sparingly. Do not spray plants in direct sun or

214 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
SQUASH
^  What (Joes Wrong 
*  
and Whv
Female
Male 
x
j H I B ;  f '  
a
 
w )
Flowers 
appear but no 
fruit develops.
Cause: Lack of female flowers. Male flowerst 
have slender stems; female flowers have -frML 
tiny fruit at base.
JfcO 
i  *
Leaves with pale green patches; 
^  
afflicted leaves wilt and blacken.
Cause: Squash bugs. Yellow ^  
^
patches turn 
g
brown; vines wilt.
Leaves 
with spots, 
blotchcs, or 
brown areas.
Cause: Alternaria leaf blight, a 
Dark brown spots with 
jfo, 
concentric rings usually 
appear on older leaves 
first; also on fruit
Leaves with 
yellow patches; 
older leaves 
mottled and distorted.
* Cause. Mosaic. Fruit may be
moltVH y*»llr>w Anri green
*  *
Leaves with spots, blotches, or 
brown areas. Cause: Angular leaf spot. 
Water-soaked spots turn gray, die, and 
,: 
f 
dropout:
' ‘i  j 
fruit deformed.
Adult 
Nymph
Larva
Larva
Leaves
mottled yellow 
between veins; 
purple spots 
on leaf undersides.
. Cause: Downy mildew.
----- 
■i/ «
1 y4" wingspan
Vines wilt suddenly.
Cause: Squash vine borers. 
Sawdustlike excrement exuded 
fcurn entry holes near base o! stem.
Leaves with chewed holes.
Cause: Cucumber beetles.
Striped or spotted beetles that 
spread bacterial wilt as they feed
turn brown, die. h ’f f  * 
' '
younger leaves 
become infected; 
purplish mildew ' 
• f
under leaves in M l 
wet weather.
Adults

SQUASH 
■ 
215
if temperatures are above 80°E and don't spray 
drought-stressed plants.
Leaf and Vine Problems
Leaves with chewed holes. Cause: Cucum­
ber beetles. Adults are '/«" long, greenish yel­
low beetles with black stripes or spots. Larvae 
chew on roots. For an illustration of this pest, 
see the opposite page. They attack young leaves 
and should be controlled immediately as they 
can spread bacterial wilt or viral diseases. 
Treat infested plants with a commercial pyre­
thrin spray or dust. Reduce problems by plant­
ing cultivars, such as ‘Bennings Green Tint’, 
‘Blue Hubbard’, ‘Early Butternut Hybrid’, 
‘Seneca’, and Table King’, that tolerate beetles.
Leaves with pale green patches; afflicted 
leaves wilt and blacken. Cause: Squash bugs. 
Adults are brownish black,'/?" long bugs. Imma­
ture bugs are whitish green with dark heads 
and legs. Eggs are bright orange and laid on 
undersides of leaves. R>r an illustration of this 
pest, see the opposite page. Handpick adults 
and eggs. Trap bugs by laying a board near 
plants. Squash bugs will hide underneath it 
and can be destroyed each morning. To reduce 
problems, plant cultivars that tolerate squash 
bugs such as ‘Early Prolific’, ‘Early Summer’, 
‘Royal Acorn’, and Table Queen’.
Leaves with yellow patches; older leaves 
mottled and distorted. Cause: Mosaic. Sev­
eral types of mosaic viruses are found on squash. 
Besides affecting leaves, mosaics may also 
cause deformed fruit that is mottled with yel­
low and green. For an illustration of this disease, 
see the opposite page. Remove and destroy 
diseased plants. Control aphids and cucum­
ber beetles that spread it. Reduce problems 
by planting cultivars. such as ‘M ultipik’, 
‘Napolini’, ‘Superpik’. and ‘Superset’, that tol­
erate mosaic.
Leaves yellow, curled, and wilted. Cause: 
Aphids. Look for small, green, pink, gray, black.
or white fluffy-coated. soft-bodied insects feed­
ing on plants. Aphids can also transmit viral 
diseases. Control aphids by knocking them 
off the plants with a strong blast of water. Or 
spray with weak insecticidal soap: read the 
caution above before spraying. Prevent prob­
lems by using a foil mulch or by planting 
silver-leaved cultivars, such as ‘Cocozelle\ that 
confuse or don’t attract aphids.
Leaves yellow and puckered, becoming 
bronzed. Cause: M ites. These tiny, red, yellow, 
or green, spiderlike creatures are worst in dry, 
hot weather. In severe cases leaves dry out and 
drop off. There may be a fine webbing on the 
undersides of leaves. Spray plants with a weak 
insecticidal soap spray to control; see the cau­
tion above before spraying.
Leaves mottled yellow between veins; pur­
ple spots on leaf undersides. Cause: Downy 
mildew. For an illustration of this disease, see 
the opposite page. As the disease progresses, 
spots enlarge, older leaves turn brown and 
die, and younger leaves become infected. Treat 
plants with a dilute solution of copper spray to 
reduce the spread of the disease. Prevent prob­
lems by planting tolerant cultivars such as 
‘Super Select’ and ‘Zucchini Select’.
I>eaves with spots, blotches, or brown areas. 
Causes: Powdery mildew; angular leaf spot; 
scab: Alternaria leaf blight; other fungal and 
bacterial diseases. Various diseases attack 
squash. Reduce problems by keeping foliage 
dry when watering and by not touching plants 
when wet. Spray infected plants with a dilute 
solution of copper spray to reduce the spread 
of the disease.
Powdery while spots, especially on upper 
leaf surfaces, are caused by powdery mildew. 
As the disease progresses, leaves turn brown 
and dry, and plants may die. Prevent problems 
by planting resistant cultivars such as ‘Multipik’ 
and ‘Zucchini Select’.
Water-soaked spots that turn gray, die, 
and drop out leaving shotholes are caused by

216 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
angular leaf spot. Fruit infected with angular 
leaf spot has small, cracked, white spots. For 
an illustration of this disease, see page 214. 
Water-soaked spots can also be caused by 
scab. Scab causes sunken, brown spots with 
gummy ooze on fruit; damage is worst in cool, 
moist weather.
Dark brown spots with concentric rings, 
usually appearing on older leaves first, are 
caused by Alternaria leaf blight. As the dis­
ease progresses, spots enlarge and merge, and 
leaves curl down and eventually drop off. 
Infected fruit has dark, concentrically ringed, 
sunken spots. For an illustration of this disease, 
see page 214.
Vines wilt suddenly. Cause: Squash vine 
borers. These fat, white, 1" long larvae burrow 
into the stems and exude masses of yellow- 
green, sawdustlike excrement. For an illus­
tration of this pest, see page 214. Slit stems 
lengthwise above injury with a sharp knife and 
kill larvae. Cover cut stems with moist soil so 
they will form new roots. Injecting stems with 
BTK or parasitic nematodes may also control 
borers. To reduce problems, plant the cultivar 
‘Sweet Mama Hybrid', which is resistant to 
vine borers. Or spray base of stems with BTK 
once a week in late spring and early summer.
Vines wilt at midday, starting with youn­
ger leaves; leaves remain green. Cause: Bac­
terial wilt. For an illustration of this disease, 
see page 150. As the disease progresses, leaves 
fail to recover, and die. Cut wilted stems and 
press out drops of sap. If it is milky, sticky, and 
astringent, your plant is infected. Destroy 
infected plants immediately. Control cucum­
ber beetles since they spread the disease.
Fruit Problems
Flowers appear but no fruit develops.
Causes: Male flower: lack of pollination. Male 
flowers open a week or more before female 
flowers and don't form fruit. See page 214 for 
an illustration of male and female squash
flowers. If female flowers fail to set fruit, or if 
small fruit turns black and rots starting at 
blossom end, they haven’t been pollinated. 
Pollinate open female flowers by hand.
Fruit misshapen. Causes: Diseases: poor 
pollination. Many diseases cause misshapen 
fruit; use leaf symptoms (if any) to diagnose 
the problem (see “Leaf and Vine Problems" 
on page 215). If leaves are healthy, high tem­
peratures may have damaged pollen, or bees 
may not have been active.
Fruit with spots; flesh may rot. Causes: 
Angular leaf spot; Alternaria blight; scab. Sev­
eral fungal and bacterial diseases cause these 
symptoms on squash fruit. For com plete 
controls, see "Leaves with spots, blotches, or 
brown areas" on page 215.
Fruit tunneled. Cause: Pickleworms. Lar­
vae are pale green with black, and up to 
long. Keep fruit off ground or mulch, since 
worms feed at soil level.
Strawberry
Fragaria X ananassa (Rosaceae)
Strawberries are herbaceous perennials 
growing from crowns that send forth whorls of 
leaves, flowers, and surface runners with new 
daughter plants at their nodes. June-bearing 
strawberries bloom in spring for only 1 crop. 
Everbearing strawberries bloom and fruit in 
the spring and again in the fall. Day-neutral 
strawberries are unaffected by day length and 
bear heavily from June through frost in north­
ern areas; January through August in milder 
climates. Day-neutrals are somewhat more dif­
ficult to grow than the other types; they are 
fragile and sensitive to heat, drought, and weed 
competition.

STRAWBERRY ■ 
217
Culture
Plant strawberries in well-drained soil rich 
in organic matter. The ideal location is in full 
sun on high or sloping ground. Avoid frost- 
prone, low-lying areas.
To prevent diseases associated with 
overcrowding, allow a square foot of space for 
each plant. Choose 1 of 3 different planting 
systems: hill, matted row. or spaced runner. 
For a hill system, space plants 1' apart each 
way in double rows, with 2-3' between each 
double row. Remove every runner so plants 
channel their energy into producing large 
berries. Since plants are well-spaced, the hill 
system minimizes diseases associated with 
crowding. For a matted-row system, space plants 
1 '/i-2' apart in rows 4' apart. Allow the run­
ners and daughter plants to grow in all direc­
tions to form a wide, solid row. For the 
spaced-runner system, set plants closer than 
the matted row; remove all but a few runners. 
Pin down runner tips so daughter plants are 
about 8" apart in every direction.
Even well-managed straw berries will 
decline after a few seasons. Start a fresh bed in 
a new site with new plants every few years. 
Renovate June-bearers each year right after 
harvest. Cut off and rake away leaves; dig out 
old. woody plants; and thin out remaining 
plants. Then fertilize and water.
Flower and Fruit Problems
Fruit deeply furrowed or gnarled (cat­
faced). Causes: Tarnished plant bugs; frost 
damage. Tarnished plant bugs can damage 
strawberries by injecting a toxin into fruit while 
sucking fluids from stem tips. buds, and fruit. 
Since they overwinter in dead garden refuse, 
the simplest control is to clean out dead plant 
tops at the end of the season. A floating row 
cover applied during the growing season also 
helps minimize damage. As a last resort, apply 
pyrethrin to flowering plants. See page 218 for 
an illustration of this pest.
Flowers damaged by frost will produce 
deform ed, cat-faced fruit. If spring frost 
threatens, cover beds overnight with a blanket.
Fruit with holes. Causes: Slugs and snails; 
earwigs; birds. Silvery trails near holes indi­
cate slugs or snails. Keep these pests out with 
barriers of copper flashing, dry ashes, or dia- 
tomaceous earth. After rain renew ashes or 
diatomaceous earth. Or trap slugs under boards, 
in overturned clay pots, or in saucers of beer. 
See page 218 for an illustration of this pest.
Earwigs, leathery brown insects with pin­
cers at their abdomen tips, nibble holes in 
fruit. Since they hide in dark places, trap them 
in short lengths of hose or rolled-up newspaper. 
Check traps and destroy captured earwigs daily.
The best defense against birds is a net 
well-secured at the edges. See “Stopping Ani­
mal Pests” on page 408 for controls.
Fruit rotted. Causes: Gray mold; leather 
mold. Both diseases strike during rainy weather. 
Fruit that rots rapidly and then turns into 
fuzzy balls is infected with gray mold. Blos­
soms infected with gray mold turn brown and 
die. See page 218 for an illustration of this 
disease.
Leather mold causes fruit to turn dark 
and leathery. Infected fruit is bitter-tasting. To 
minimize these fungal diseases, thin plants to 
avoid overcrowding and mulch beds to keep 
fruit off the soil. Pick and dispose of infected 
fruit as soon as you notice them. Annual bed 
renovation helps control gray mold.
Leaf Problems
Leaves with spots. Causes: Leaf spot; 
leaf blight: leaf scorch. Leaf spot causes small 
purple spots that develop tan centers on foliage. 
See page 218 for an illustration of leaf spot. 
Leaf blight is characterized by oval or V-shaped 
spots with purple centers and tan borders. 
Irregular, purplish blotches are the symptoms 
of leaf scorch. When severe, these diseases 
kill leaves, which weakens plants. Berries are

218 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
Leaves with sp o ts. Cause: 
Leaf spot Small purple spots 
develop tan centers; leaves die. 
weakening plants; 
fruit may be ; 
spotted,
E « 
Fruit rotted.
^ 
Cause Gray mold. 
Light tan spots appear on 
fruit; berries eventually turn 
soft and may be covered 
with gray fuzz.
Leaves rolled up.
Cause: Strawberry leafrollers. 
Larvae hide within webbed, 
rolled-up leaves; leaves
Nymph
W hole plant w ilted o r 
collapsed. Cause: Black 
root rot. Stunted, 
weak plants die 
at fruiting time; 
roots rotted with 
blackened areas.
Leaves 
with a 
white powdery 
coating. Cause: 
Powdery mildew. 
Leaf undersides 
turn reddish; 
edges roll up.
Fruit w ith holes. Cause:
Slugs and snails. These 
night-feeding pests 
consume flowers.
. and berries: 
leave silvery slime trails.
may brown and die: fruit 
is deformed.
Leaves surrounded by 
frothy white mass.
Cause: Spittlebugs.
Pests suck sap from 
plants; produce a frothy 
mass of bubbles for shelter.
Larva
Adult
Adult
Adult
wingspan
Fruit deeply 
furrowed 
or gnarled
fruit, injecting a toxin 
that causes deformities.

STRAWBERRY ■ 
219
spotted as well. All 3 are fungal diseases that 
you can control by annual bed renovation. 
Cultivars resistant to all 3 of these diseases 
include ‘Albritton*, Blakemore*, ‘Earlibelle*, 
‘Fairfax', and “Midland*. ‘Cardinal*. ‘Delite*, 
‘Redchief, and ‘Surecrop* are resistant to leaf 
blight and leaf scorch.
Leaves with a white powdery coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. The powdery coat­
ing may be less apparent on strawberries than 
with other mildew-afflicted plants. The under­
sides of infected leaves turn reddish and the 
edges roll up. Infected fruit is stunted, rotted, 
or fails to ripen. .See the opposite page for an 
illustration of this disease. Keeping plants ade­
quately spaced and cleaning up dead plant 
debris help minimize this fungal disease. For 
persistent mildew, apply sulfur spray or dust. 
Or plant mildew-resistant cultivars. such as 
‘Albritton*, ‘Catskill*. Puget Beauty*,‘Sparkle*, 
‘Sunrise*, or ‘Surecrop*.
Leaves rolled up. Cause: Strawberry 
leaf rollers. These green or brown. Kh" cater­
pillars mine leaves in the early spring and later 
form webs and roll leaves as they feed. Leaves 
may brown and die: fruit is deformed. For 
light infestations, destroy the rolled leaves along 
with the caterpillars inside. For a very heavy 
infestation, apply BTK. See the opposite page 
for an illustration of this pest.
Leaves surrounded by frothy white mass. 
Cause: Spittlebugs. These tiny tan, brown, or 
black insects, which hide inside the frothy 
masses of bubbles they produce, suck sap from 
leaves, stems, and flowers. See the opposite 
page for an illustration of this pest. Spittlebugs 
rarely cause significant damage. To control 
them, wash them off with a strong spray of water.
Leaves with brown, dry undersides and 
fine webbing. Cause: Spider mites. Heavy pes­
ticide use often kills naturally occurring mite 
predators, resulting in an abundance of spider 
mites. Spider mites also multiply in dry. dusty 
conditions. Repeated sprays with plain or soapy 
water usually control mites. For heavy mite
infestation, purchase and release predatory 
mites (Metaseiulus occidentalis).
Whole Plant Problems
Whole plant wilted or collapsed. Causes: 
Black root rot: red stele disease: Verticillium 
wilt; strawberry crown moth larvae; straw­
berry crown borers. To discover which cause 
applies, remove a plant from the soil and exam­
ine its roots. Rotting black roots indicate black 
root rot: plants are stunted, produce few fruits, 
and may die at fruiting time. See the opposite 
page for an illustration of black root rot.
If roots look like “rattails" (few or no side 
roots) and are red inside when slit lengthwise, 
red stele is the problem. Both fungal diseases 
survive in soils for up to 10 years without a 
host plant; the only control is to plant new 
plants in well-drained soil at a new site. Culti­
vars resistant to some strains of red stele include 
‘Columbia*, ’Earliglow*, ‘Guardian*, ‘Hood*, 
‘Rainier*, ‘Redchief, ‘Sparkle*, and ‘Surecrop*.
Wilted plants with no root damage may 
have Verticillium wilt. Verticillium-infected 
plants look stunted and may collapse during 
their first summer in the ground; inner leaves 
may remain green until the plant dies. There 
is no cure for Verticillium wilt. You must plant 
a new bed where you haven't grown strawber­
ries or other Verticillium-susceptible plants, 
such as tom atoes, peppers, potatoes, or 
eggplants, for the past few years. Verticillium- 
resistant cultivars include ‘Blakemore’, ‘Catskill', 
‘Guardian’, ‘Robinson', ‘Sunrise*, and ‘Surecrop’.
Wilted plants with healthy roots may be 
infested with strawberry1 crown moth larvae or 
strawberry crown borer larvae. Crown borers 
are •//' snout beetles and crown moths are 
large, clear-winged moths. Both pests lay eggs 
on strawberries. The resulting grublike larvae 
burrow into plant crowns and cause wilting 
and death. Cut crowns of wilted plants in half. 
If you find a large tunnel, your plants are 
infected with one of these pests. The only 
cure is to dig up and destroy these plants

220 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT (il IDF
immediately. Crown borers don't fly and can’t 
crawl more lhan 300 feet, so starting with 
clean plants planted far from old infested beds 
keeps this pest in check.
Whole plant stunted; roots and crown 
chewed. Cause: Strawberry root weevils. The 
brown-headed, white larvae feed on plant 
crowns and roots; the black, W  adult weevils 
may feed on leaves. Apply parasitic nema­
todes to the soil to control larvae. For severe 
infestations of adults, dust with pyrethrin.
Sweet Potato
Ipomoea batatas (Convolvulaceae)
Sweet potatoes are perennial vegetables 
grown as annuals in temperate regions for 
their tuberous roots. While they are tropical 
natives, you can grow them if you get at least 
100 frost-free days. Cultivars have light yel­
low to purplish red skin, and white to deep 
orange flesh.
Culture
Sweel potatoes prefer loose, well-drained 
soil with a pH between 6.0 and 6.5. They 
require moderate amounts of nitrogen and 
boron, moderate to high levels of phosphorus, 
and high levels of potassium. Have the soil 
tested and amend as necessary before planting. 
Sweet potatoes do well in raised beds. Work in 
lots of organic matter before planting. Avoid 
top-dressing after early summer, or root for­
mation may be interrupted.
Keep soil moist, but not soggy, until the 
vines begin to spread. After that, water only if 
vines wilt. When the roots begin to enlarge in 
late summer, keep the soil moist again until 
harvest. Mulch plants to suppress weeds and 
conserve moisture. Black plastic mulch will 
also warm the soil.
Plant sweet potatoes where they have not 
been grown for at least 2 years. After harvest, 
cut vines and let dry, then compost or till 
under to reduce disease buildup.
Purchase disease-free plants, or start your 
own from healthy, overwintered roots. Plant 
out when nights stay above 60°F Soak plant 
roots in compost tea for 5 minutes before 
planting to help reduce disease problems. Water 
in with a fish emulsion or fish-meal tea after 
planting to give the plants a good start.
Dig potatoes gently before the first frost, 
after foliage starts to yellow. Dry them for 2-3 
hours in the garden. Sort out any damaged or 
diseased potatoes to use as soon as possible. 
Cure healthy potatoes for 10 days in a 80°-85°F 
humid place. Gradually reduce temperature 
and store them in a 55°-60°F humid room.
Leaf and Whole Plant Problems
Leaves yellow between veins. Causes: 
Stem rot; Fusarium wilt. Symptoms of stem 
rot, also known as bacterial soft rot, usually 
appear when temperatures are above 90°F 
Leaves turn yellow, vines wilt, and the base of 
stems are black and shiny. Destroy diseased 
plants. Roots may already be rotted or will rot 
in storage, so use any healthy potatoes as soon 
as possible. Prevent problems by planting 
disease-free plants or tolerant cultivars such 
as ‘Goldmar’.
If young leaves are yellow and wilted, 
and older leaves drop, the plant is suffering 
from Fusarium wilt. The stems may have a 
faint purple coloration just below the soil line. 
Destroy plants infected with this fungal disease. 
Prevent problems by planting disease-free plants 
or resistant cultivars such as ‘Allgold*.
Leaves with purple-bordered yellow spots. 
Cause: Internal cork. Destroy infected plants. 
See “Potatoes with hard, dark, corky spots in 
the center of flesh” below for controls.
Leaves yellow with dead, brown spots; 
plant stunted. Cause: Nematodes. See “Pota­
toes with rough, rotted pits” below for controls.

SWEET POTATO 
■ 
221
Leaves thin and pale; plant stunted. Cause: 
Pox. See "Potatoes with rough, rotted pits* 
below for controls.
Leaves riddled with small holes. Cause: 
Flea beetles. These tiny, black, brown, or bronze 
insects hop like fleas when disturbed. Adults 
can transmit disease when feeding, and larvae 
damage roots. Control flea beetle adults by 
covering plants with row cover as soon as they 
are planted out. Apply parasitic nematodes to 
the soil to help control larvae. Reduce prob­
lems by planting tolerant cultivars such as 
‘Centennial’ and ‘Jewell'.
Leaves with large, round holes. Causes: 
Tortoise beetles; caterpillars. Tortoise beetles 
are ‘A" long, oval, flattened beetles with vary­
ing colors and patterns on their wing covers. 
Larvae are xh n long and have flattened bodies 
with spiny margins and a forked horn at the 
tail end. Both adults and larvae damage young 
plants. Handpick to control mild infestations, 
or treat plants with a commercial pyrethrin 
spray if damage is severe.
Caterpillars sometimes feed on sweet 
potato leaves. Spray plants with BTK if cater­
pillars are feeding.
Root Problems
Potatoes long and spindly. Causes: Potas­
sium deficiency; growing season too short. 
Check for deficiency with a soil test and amend 
soil as necessary. Sweet potatoes need a long 
growing season. Prevent problems by planting 
cultivars suited to your region.
Potatoes cracked. Cause: Uneven soil 
moisture. If soil is alternately dry then wet, 
roots may split their skins. Prevent problems 
by keeping soil evenly moist and storage humid­
ity constant. Some cultivars. such as ‘Jewell' 
and Puerto Rico 198’, are somewhat resistant 
to cracking.
Potatoes with dark discolored patches on 
skin. Cause: Scurf. Symptoms often appear 
in storage. Initial damage is only skin deep, 
but subsequently, skin may split open, causing
the flesh to shrivel up. Prevent this fungal 
disease by planting disease-free plants and by 
keeping storage temperatures above 50°E
Potatoes with black, circular, corky 
depressions. Cause: Black rot. Symptoms of 
this fungal disease may develop in the garden 
or in storage. Flesh under spots is brown to 
green and has a bitter taste, so trim well before 
using. Prevent problems by starting with disease- 
free plants, controlling root-feeding insects, 
and by planting resistant cultivars such as 
Allgold’.
Potatoes with hard, dark, corky spots in 
the center of flesh. Cause: Internal cork. This 
condition develops if storage conditions are 
too warm and may be caused by a viral disease. 
Store potatoes between 55° and 60°F to reduce 
problems. Prevent problems by planting toler­
ant cultivars such as ‘Allgold’, ‘Centennial*, 
and ‘Nemagold*.
Potatoes with rough, rotted pits. Causes: 
Pox; nematodes. Plants with pox, a bacterial 
disease, may be pale and stunted, and roots 
often resemble a string of irregular beads. 
Destroy infected plants and use healthy roots 
as soon as possible. Prevent problems by plant­
ing disease-free plants. Adjust the soil pH to 
below 5.2 by adding sulfur if pox has been a 
major problem in the past. While this is below 
the optimal pH range for sweet potatoes, they 
will tolerate it and the bacteria will be inactive.
Root knot and other pest nematodes cause 
poorly colored, deformed potatoes with rot­
ted areas under the skin, surface blemishes, and 
surface cracks. Control pest nematodes by ap­
plying a chitin or parasitic nematodes to the 
soil. Prevent problems by planting nematode- 
resistant cultivars such as Heart', ‘Jasper*, 
‘Jewell’, ‘Kandee*. ‘Nemagold’, and ‘Nugget*.
Potatoes with small holes, tunnels, or shal­
low splits. Causes: Rea beetle larvae; sweet 
potato weevils; wireworms. Sweet potato flea 
beetle larvae tunnel just under the skin. As 
the roots grow, the skin over the tunnels splits 
open, leaving shallow scars. Larvae are W ,

222 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
slender, and white. Striped flea beetle larvae 
are white and up to 'A "  long; they tunnel into 
the center of roots leaving wandering, branched 
tunnels. See “Leaves riddled with small holes’ 
on page 221 for controls.
Sweet potato weevil adults are small, 
reddish, antlike insects. Larvae are white with 
pale brown heads and grow up to V»" long. 
Larvae tunnel into potatoes in the field or in 
storage. Weevils do not hibernate and must 
have food to survive. Destroy all plant residue 
and weeds after harvest to control them. Apply 
parasitic nematodes to the soil if weevils have 
been a problem in the past.
Wireworm larvae are yellow to reddish 
brown, slender, tough-bodied, segmented 
worms with brown heads and grow up to V/i" 
long. Adults are dark-colored, elongated click 
beetles. To prevent problems, don't plant sweet 
potatoes in soil where grass or grain grew the 
previous season. Apply parasitic nematodes to 
the soil before planting, and plant tolerant 
cultivars such as ‘Centennial*.
Potatoes with large, shallow feeding scars 
or hollow cavities. Causes: White grubs; cut­
worms; cucumber beetles. White grubs are 
fat. whitish larvae that tend to feed over the 
whole surface of the potato. Adults are Japan­
ese or June beetles. Apply parasitic nema­
todes to the soil before planting to control.
Cutworms are grayish or dull brown cat­
erpillars that curl up when disturbed and are 
active at night. Cutworms tend to feed near 
the ends of potatoes. Sprinkle moist bran mixed 
with BTK on the soil surface in the evening, 
or add parasitic nematodes to the soil before 
planting to control cutworms.
Spotted cucum ber beetle larvae (also 
called southern com rootworms) are white 
with brown heads and grow up to W  long. 
Adults are V /\ greenish yellow beetles with 
black spots. Treat infested plants with a com­
mercial pyrethrin spray if the damage is se­
vere. Prevent problems by covering plants with 
row cover.
Potatoes turn spongy in storage. Cause: 
Cold injury. Cool temperatures can damage 
sweet potatoes. Harvest when air is above 
50°F and store above 50°F to prevent injury.
Potatoes rot in storage. Cause: Various 
bacterial and fungal diseases. Prevent prob­
lems by planting disease-free plants and cur­
ing and storing potatoes at the recommended 
temperatures and humidity levels; see “Cul­
ture” on page 220 for instructions. Soak pota­
toes in a 10 percent bleach solution (1 part 
bleach to 9 parts water) for a few minutes before 
curing if storage rots have been a past problem.
Syringa
Lilac. Shrubs and small trees.
Lilacs are among the most popular of 
deciduous flowering shrubs. They bloom in 
late spring in a number of colors; borne in 
large clusters, the flowers arc exquisitely 
fragrant. Lilacs are plants of cool weather; 
with few exceptions, they do not flourish south 
of Zone 7. Lilacs are best used in the mixed 
shrub border, grouped for emphasis in the 
landscape, or planted for screening.
Plant in spring or fall in full sun with 
neutral or slightly alkaline soil enriched with 
ample organic matter. Prune and deadhead 
them immediately after blooming. Lilacs are 
available either on their own roots or grafted 
onto privet roots; the form er are much 
preferred. Cut back to the ground any suckers 
that form.
Problems
Leaves with powdery white coating.
Cause: Powdery mildew. This is a very com­
mon problem on lilacs. See “Leaves with pow­
dery white coating” on page 237 for controls.

TAGETES ■ 
223
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. For 
controls, see “Leaves tunneled*' on page 237.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237 for control measures.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. For details, 
see “Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break o ff' on page 238.
Leaves wilted and discolored; branches 
die back. Cause: Blight. Both a bacterial and 
a fungal blight attack lilacs, causing similar 
symptoms. Prune out and destroy infected 
branches during the dormant season. Disinfect 
pruners after each cut in a 10 percent bleach 
solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts water). In 
spring, spray twice with bordeaux mix at 10-day 
intervals, starting when the leaves first unfold.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots” on page 237 for controls.
Leaves pale and drop early; branches wilt 
and die. Cause: Wilt. If plants are affected by 
this fungus, prune off dead and diseased 
branches. Feeding with a high-nitrogen fertil­
izer may help plants recover. Remove and 
destroy badly infected shrubs, and don't plant 
lilacs in the same soil.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
For control measures, see “Leaves skeleton­
ized or with large holes; branches may be 
webbed” on page 236.
Shoots clustered tightly, with small leaves. 
Cause: Witches’ broom. This problem is usu­
ally not serious; merely prune out and destroy 
the dense, bushy growth.
Tagetes
Marigold. Annuals.
Hearty marigolds are a mainstay of the 
early summer to late-fall garden. Flower col­
ors range from palest yellow and near-white to 
red and mahogany red; some are even bicolored.
Single or double blooms may be l"-6" wide. 
The 6"- 36" plants are covered with finely cut 
leaves. Marigolds may have a strong odor; if 
you dislike the scent, look for an odorless 
cultivar. Marigolds are good bedding plants, 
pot plants, and cut flowers.
It's easy to raise marigolds by sowing the 
seed directly into the garden 2-3 weeks before 
the last frost. For best results, hold the white 
tuft of each seed and place the long dark
Copyrighted material

224 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
section into the ground at an angle. Indoors, 
seeds sown in flats germinate within 2 weeks at 
about 70°E Move outdoors only after all frost 
danger has passed. Thin or plant 8"-18" apart.
Marigolds thrive in full sun, except in 
southern and southwestern areas where after­
noon shade prolongs bloom. They demand 
regular watering and well-drained, average soil. 
Pick off old flower heads. Taller cultivars need 
staking. Avoid overhead watering, as even the 
small blossoms hold water like cups, and the 
weight may cause the brittle stems to snap. If 
you work compost into the soil at planting 
time, no extra fertilizer is necessary.
Problems
Leaves skeletonized; flowers eaten. Cause: 
Japanese beetles. This xh* long pest has a 
metallic blue-green body and bronze wing 
covers. Besides feeding on leaves, the adult 
beetles often chew on buds and flowers. Hand- 
pick in early morning (when the beetles move 
more slowly) if there are only a few.
leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. For control measures, 
see “Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage 
webbed“ on page 18.
Flowers covered with gray mold. Cause: 
Botrytis blight. Brown spots may appear on 
leaves, and petals may turn black. Botrytis is 
promoted by overhead watering, continuing 
cool, wet weather, or crowded plantings that 
impede air circulation. Once this fungal dis­
ease appears, it may spread to healthy plants 
on contact, or by wind, rain, or handling. 
Remove and discard infected blooms. Avoid 
wetting flowers when watering.
Stems turn black at base; plant wilts. 
Cause: Stem rot. Caused by either bacteria or 
fungi, stem rot starts at the soil level and 
works upward. Remove and destroy infected 
plants. Don’t replant marigolds in that area 
unless you solarize the soil.
Leaves greenish yellow; growth poor.
Cause: Aster yellows. For more information, 
see “Leaves greenish yellow; growth poor” on 
page 19.
Taxus
Yew. Shrubs and trees.
Yews are evergreen shrubs and trees with 
needle-shaped leaves arranged densely and 
spirally on the branches. The male and female 
flowers are separate on the plants, with the 
females producing fleshy red berries, each 
surrounding a toxic seed. Yews can be utilized 
as foundation plants, hedges, and even 
specimens.
Set out in spring as balled-and-burlapped 
or container-grown plants. Yews prefer a well- 
drained but moisture-retentive soil and grow 
well in full sun or partial shade.
Problems
Leaves with notched edges. Cause: Black 
vine weevils. The w in g le ss,b ro w n ish  black 
adults feed on the leaves and bark and can kill 
branches. Try spreading a dropcloth around 
your plants, then shaking the plants; the adults 
will drop and can be removed and destroyed. 
Spray leaves several times with pyrethrin for 
major infestations. The small, curved, white 
grubs of these weevils feed on the roots; drench 
the soil around the base of the plant with a 
solution of parasitic nematodes for control.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See “Leaves stippled with 
yellow; foliage webbed’’ on page 236 for 
controls.
Leaves discolored, wilted, or dropping; 
plant lacking vigor. Causes: Mealybugs; blights. 
The tiny, powdery-looking, white adults gen­

THIJA 
■ 
225
erally congregate on the trunks and interior 
branches, making them difficult to see until 
the plant starts to weaken. Control by thor­
oughly spraying the plant with superior oil or 
repeated applications of insecticidal soap.
Various blights can cause similar symp­
toms on yews. If you don't see the fluffy white 
masses that are a sign of mealybugs, suspect 
blight. Cutting off the affected portion of the 
plant is the best way to deal with this disease.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bum ps' on page 237 for controls.
Leaves yellow. Causes: Low pH: water­
logged soil. Yews prefer soils with a neutral or 
slightly acid pH (around 6.5). They do not 
grow well in highly acid soils, so avoid inter­
planting them with rhododendrons or other 
acid-loving plants. Raise the pH around your 
yews by adding 3 pounds of ground limestone 
per 100 square feet of soil area around 
the plants.
Too much water around plant roots causes 
similar symptoms. Avoid overwatering and 
planting in poorly drained areas. Improving 
the drainage around plants will help them 
recover.
Thalictrum
Meadow rue. Perennials.
Tall plants with blue-green, fernlike foliage 
and loosely fluffy clusters of lavender or yel­
low flowers, meadow rues range from 1' to over 
5' tall. Columbine meadow rue (Thalictrum 
aquilegifolium) has leaves resembling colum­
bine foliage; other species’ leaves look like 
those of maidenhair ferns.
Grow meadow rues in moist, well-drained, 
richly organic soil and partial shade. Tall flower 
stems need shelter from strong winds and may 
require staking. Water regularly to maintain 
soil moisture. Divide every 4-5 years to reduce 
crowding.
Meadow rues have few insect pests. Fun­
gal diseases such as powdery mildew may dam­
age foliage and are best controlled with cultural 
practices. See “Leaves covered with white pow­
der” on page 177 for controls.
Thuja
Arborvitae. Shrubs and trees.
Arborvitaes are evergreen trees and shrubs 
with flat sprays of scalelike leaves. They are 
excellent in foundation plantings and used as 
hedges; upright cultivars make strong speci­
men plants.
Set out in spring or fall as container- 
grown or balled-and-burlapped plants. Arbor­
vitaes thrive in deep, moist, well-drained soil 
in full sun. If possible, choose a site protected 
from strong winter winds to avoid damage.
Problems
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. These pests are one 
of the most common problems on arborvitae. 
For control measures, see “Plant defoliated; 
branches bear cocoonlike bags” on page 236.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. For controls, 
see “Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps" on page 237.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See "Leaves stippled with 
yellow; foliage webbed" on page 236.

226 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PI ANT C«lrIDH
Plant defoliated. Cause: Hemlock loop* 
ers. The 1" long, greenish yellow, black-spotted 
caterpillars usually appear in June. They feed 
on the needles, starting from the branch tips 
and working toward the center of the plant. 
Handpick small populations: control large in­
festations with BTK.
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. See 
‘‘Leaves tunneled*’ on page 237 for controls.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. For more 
information, see “Trunk or branches with small 
holes; limbs die or break o ff’ on page 238.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spoLs* on page 237 for controls.
Branch tips die back. Causes: Blight; win­
ter injury: sun scorch; drought stress. Blight, 
a fungal disease, attacks mostly during cool, 
wet weather; good air circulation among plants 
discourages its onset. Leaves of infected plants 
shrivel and twigs die back. Cut off and destroy 
dead or diseased wood. To prevent the spread 
of mild infections, spray with bordeaux mix at 
2-week interv als until the weather gets warmer 
and drier.
If you see the same symptoms in very 
early spring or during hot, dry weather, your 
arborvitae may be suffering from winter injury, 
sun scorch, or drought stress. Minimize dam­
age by watering deeply and regularly during 
dry periods. A thick mulch may also help by 
retaining moisture and keeping roots cool.
Thunbergia
Thunbergia. Annuals.
Thunbergias are showy, twining climbers 
ranging from 10' to 20' high. The 1 '/i"-3"flow­
ers may be orange with dark brown centers.
white with red centers, pure orange, or purple- 
blue. All need some type of support unless 
used in hanging baskets.
Sow seeds indoors 6 weeks before the last 
frost. Germination takes 2-3 weeks. Seedlings 
grow slowly. Place outdoors when night tem­
peratures are above 50°E Thunbergias have 
little cold tolerance, even as mature plants.
Grow plants in full sun to light shade with 
fertile, well-drained soil. Avoid sites with 
reflected light, which can cause leaf sunburn. 
If spider mites attack leaves, see “Leaves stip­
pled with yellow: foliage webbed” on page 
18. Powdery mildew can also be a problem; 
see “Leaves with powdery white patches” on 
page 19 for controls.
Thyme
Thymus vulgaris 
and other species (Labiatae)
Thyme is a hardy (Zone 5) perennial herb 
grown for its tiny, aromatic leaves. It does best 
in light, dry, well-drained soil with a pH between 
5.0 and 8.0. Thyme needs at least 4 hours of 
full sun per day. Start pinches of seed indoors 
in 70PF planting mix, purchase plants, or grow 
them from cuttings.
Thyme is normally quite problem-free. 
Dark spots on leaves are caused by fungal leaf 
spot. Spray foliage with fish emulsion or sulfur 
to prevent the spread of mild infections. Tan 
or red blisters on leaves are caused by rust, a 
fungal disease. Destroy infected leaves and 
avoid wetting leaves to prevent its spread. See 
the Herbs entry beginning on page 116 for 
other possible problems.

TOMATO ■ 
227
Tllia
Linden. Trees.
Lindens are deciduous shade trees, prin­
cipally valued for their foliage. Their sum­
mer flowers are fragrant and attractive to 
bees. Lindens are widely used as street trees 
and, because they adapt well to pruning, for 
tall hedges.
Set out in spring or fall in full sun. Lin­
dens tolerate drought and a wide range of soil 
conditions, although they perform best in deep, 
moist soils.
Problems
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. These pests, and the black, sooty 
mold that grows on the sticky honeydew they 
produce, are a common problem on lindens. 
For control measures, see “Leaves wrinkled 
and discolored” on page 235.
Leaves skeletonized. Causes: Japanese 
beetles: sawflies. See “Leaves skeletonized” 
on page 236 for controls.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. For controls, see 
“Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags" on page 236.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
Numerous caterpillars feed on foliage to vary­
ing degrees. See “Leaves skeletonized or with 
large holes: branches may be webbed” on 
page 236 for suggested controls.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps" on page 237 for control measures.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. See “Trunk 
or branches with small holes; limbs die or
break off* on page 238 for controls.
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac­
nose. See “Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves 
with moist or brown sunken spots” on page 
238 for control measures.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. See "Leaves with pow­
dery white coating" on page 237 for controls.
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. See 
“Leaves tunneled" on page 237 for controls.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. Fbr more 
information, see “Trunk or branches with 
oozing lesions; branch tips die back" on 
page 238.
Leaves pale and drop early; branches wilt 
and die. Cause: Will. Prune off dead and 
diseased branches, feeding with a high-nitrogen 
fertilizer may help plants recover. Remove and 
destroy badly infected trees, and don’t plant 
new trees in the same area; they may also be 
attacked.
Tomato
Lycopersicon esculentum (Solanaceae)
Tomatoes are tender perennials that are 
grown as annuals in temperate climates. Their 
fruits can be pale greenish white, yellow, orange, 
red, or pink, and anywhere from currant size 
to well over a pound apiece. There are 2 main 
types: Determinant cultivars grow to a certain 
height and stop, putting all their energy into 
producing fruit heavily over a 4-6 week period; 
indeterminant cultivars grow and produce fruit­
ing clusters until frost.

228 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Culture
Tomatoes require full sun and deep soil 
with a pH between 6.0 and 6.8. Work in plenty 
of compost before planting to add organic 
matter. Tomatoes require moderate levels of 
nitrogen and phosphorus, and moderate to high 
levels of potassium and calcium. Tomatoes 
grow best between 75° and 90°E Tempera­
tures over 100°Fcan kill blossoms, while tem­
peratures below 50°F can cause chilling injury.
Keep soil moist, but not soggy, and do 
not allow it to dry out. Avoid wetting leaves 
when watering to help prevent diseases. Toma­
toes do well in raised beds with drip irrigation 
and mulch. Black plastic is a good mulch in 
cool areas because it helps warm the soil as 
well as suppresses weeds and conserves water. 
Organic mulch helps keep the soil cooler in 
very warm areas while adding organic matter. 
Mulch also helps prevent disease by prevent­
ing the fruit from touching the ground or being 
splashed with soil containing disease-causing 
organisms.
Choose cultivars that are adapted to local 
growing conditions. Many are resistant to one 
or more problems. Resistant cultivars are 
usually denoted in seed catalogs as follows: 
F =  Fusarium-resistant, V = Verticillium- 
resistant, T = tobacco mosaic virus-resistant, 
and N =  nematode-resistant.
Do not plant tomatoes where tomatoes, 
potatoes, eggplants, or peppers have been 
planted within the past 3-5 years. Also, try to 
plan your planting scheme to separate these 
crops in the garden. Compost or till under all 
plant residues at the end of the season to re­
duce overwintering pests. After tilling, spread 
2-4 pounds of bloodmeal or soybean meal per 
each 100 square feet to encourage rapid break­
down of plant material.
Purchase stocky, insect- and disease-free 
plants, or start your own from seed indoors. 
Soak seed in a 10 percent bleach solution (1 
part bleach and 9 parts water) for 10 minutes
and rinse in clean water before planting to 
reduce seed-borne diseases. Tomato seeds 
germinate best between 75° and 90°F Once 
seedlings are up, they grow best between 60° 
and 70°F When plants are set out, add 1 cup 
each of bonemeal and kelp to each hole. Water 
the transplants thoroughly with fish emulsion 
or compost tea to give them a good start. 
Spray young plants with seaweed extract to 
help prevent transplant shock and nutrient 
deficiencies.
Leaf and Whole Plant Problems
Seedlings fall over; stems girdled or rot­
ted at soil line. Cause: Damping-off. Disin­
fect reused pots and flats by dipping them in a 
10 percent bleach solution and letting them air- 
dry before filling them with fresh seed-starting 
mix. Sow seed thinly to allow for air movement 
around seedlings. Cover seed with a thin layer 
of soilless mix or vermiculite. Water only enough 
to keep soil moist, not soggy. Thin seedlings 
and spray with compost tea as soon as first 
true leaves open to help prevent the problem.
Seedlings clipped off at soil line. Cause: 
Cutworms. Check for fat, 1 "-2" long, dull brown 
or gray caterpillars in the soil near the base of 
plants. Once they chew off a seedling, there is 
nothing you can do except protect the remain­
ing seedlings from nocturnal cutworm attacks. 
To prevent cutworm damage, place cutworm 
collars around transplants, sprinkle moist bran 
mixed with BTK on the soil surface in the 
evening, or add parasitic nematodes to the 
soil at least a week before planting.
Leaves yellow or pale. Cause: Nutrient 
deficiency. Spray young plants with seaweed 
extract to help prevent deficiencies, and add 
compost to the soil. Have the soil tested and 
amend as necessary.
If young leaves are yellow with green veins, 
suspect iron deficiency. Reduce soil pH to 
help make iron more available. If dark spots 
develop in the yellow areas, and leaves are

TOMATO 
■ 
229
What (Joes Wrong 
and Whv
Adult
4" Larva
4" wingspan 
Adult
'W
fj 
Fruit with small holes 
on surface; interior rotted and hollow.
Cause: T omato fruitworms. Fruit collapses: pests 
also feed on leaves.
Leaves with large, 
^
ragged holes or leaves missing.
Cause: Homworms. Large green caterpillars 
rapidly consume leaves and sometimes fruit
Leaves with dark,
^ c o n c e n tric a lly  ringed 
1 spots. Cause: Eariy Wight.
Similat spot > appear on fruit.
* *  .
(■Leaves with brown edges. 
Pfcause. Bacterial canker.
Lower leaves wilt, curl up: 
fruit develops raised spots with white margins.
Fruit with concentrically 
ringed, sunken spots.
Cause: Anthracnose.
Fruit eventually rots.
B  
Leaves mottled 
"^with yellow; young growth
narrow and tw isted. Cause: Tobacco mosaic virus.
Fruit may iave yellow patches or ripen unevenly. —
Fruit with black, 
sunken area at 
blossom  end. 
Cause: Bk>ssom 
end rot. Usually 
appears on first 
fruit of season, 
either ure^n or ripe
jk *  
Jr OWer
, 
* J • 
/ leaves yellow;
shoots or
w hole plant wilts. 
W Cause Fusarium wilt 
Infected plant eventually wilts and dies.

250 
■ 
PROBI J-M SOLVING PI ANT GUDE
small and narrow, the problem may be zinc 
deficiency. If older leaves are yellow with green 
veins, and then become bronzed, suspect potas­
sium deficiency.
If young leaves are pale and growing tips 
die. the problem may be calcium deficiency. 
Add high-calcium lime, dolomitic lime if mag­
nesium is also low. wood ashes, or gypsum to 
the soil.
Plants that are stunted and have yellow 
or pale older leaves may be nitrogen deficient.
Leaves yellow, distorted, and sticky. 
Cause: Aphids. Leaves may develop brown 
spots. These small green, black, gray, pink, or 
white fluffy-coated insects suck plant sap. For 
mild infestations, knock pests off plants with 
a blast of water. Spray plants with insecticidal 
soap in the evening to control, or with a com­
mercial neem or pyrethrin spray if infestation 
is severe.
Leaves of young plant purple. Causes: 
Phosphorus deficiency; lack of dark period. 
Phosphorus is unavailable in cool soil; symp­
toms usually fade as soil warms. Spray plants 
with seaweed extract to alleviate symptoms.
Seedlings grown under lights will be pur­
ple if the lights are left on continuously. Give 
seedlings 8 hours of darkness each night to 
reverse or prevent purpling.
Leaves stippled or bronzed. Cause: Mites. 
A fine webbing may be present below or 
between leaves. Infested leaves dry out and 
fall off. These tiny, spiderlike insects feed on 
plant sap and thrive in hot. dry weather. Spray 
plants with insecticidal soap or sulfur to con­
trol mites.
Leaves mottled with yellow; young growth 
narrow and twisted. Cause: Tobacco mosaic 
virus. See page 229 for an illustration of tobacco 
mosaic virus (TM V >. Destroy diseased plants. 
Presoak seed in 10 percent bleach solution 
before planting, or choose resistant cultivars 
to prevent problems. Wash hands after han­
dling tobacco and before touching tomatoes
to prevent TMV, and control aphids, which 
spread viruses as they feed.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted and wilts in 
hot weather. Cause: Root knot nematodes. 
Plants eventually die. Check roots for swollen 
sections or galls up to 1" in diameter. Destroy 
infested plants: do not compost them. Apply 
chitin or parasitic nematodes to the soil to 
control the pests.
Older leaves yellow; shoots or whole plant 
wilts. Cause: Walnut, Fusarium, or Verticil­
lium wilt. Walnut wilt occurs in soil contain­
ing black walnut roots, which secrete a 
substance that is toxic to many kinds of plants. 
Tomatoes within 50' of black walnut trees or 
stumps wilt and die suddenly. The toxic com­
pound remains in the soil for some years after 
trees are cut down. Plant your tomatoes at 
least 50' from walnut trees. If this is impossible, 
grow tomatoes in containers in a good organic 
potting mix.
Fusarium wilt and Verticillium wilt are 
both fungal diseases and are difficult to tell 
apart. See page 229 for an illustration of 
Fusarium wilt. Both Fusarium and Verticil­
lium wilts begin as a yellowing and wilting of 
the lower leaves. Plants are stunted and do not 
recover when watered. Cut open a stem near 
the soil line and look for internal discoloration. 
Verticillium wilt usually affects the whole plant 
while Fusarium may infect individual shoots 
before the whole plant is affected. Fusarium 
thrives in warmer temperatures (80°-90°F) 
than Verticillium does (68°-75°F). Destroy 
infected plants. Tomato Fusarium infects only 
tomatoes; Verticillium infects a wide range of 
plant species, making effective rotation con­
trol difficult. Prevent problems by presoaking 
seed in a 10 percent bleach solution or by plant­
ing resistant cultivars. Control pest nematodes 
to help reduce wilt problems.
Whole plant wilts; leaves remain green. 
Cause: Southern bacterial wilt. Plants do not 
recover when watered. This disease is most

TOMATO 
■ 
231
damaging in the Deep South. Destroy infected 
plants. Prevent problems by planting tolerant 
cultivars such as ‘Saturn' and ‘Venus'.
Leaves with small dark spots. Causes: 
Bacterial spot; bacterial speck. Centers of 
spots may dry and fall out. Leaves may turn 
yellow, then brown, and fall off. Spray infected 
plants with copper to prevent development of 
further symptoms.
Leaves with dark, water-soaked patches. 
Causes: Late blight; Septoria leaf spot. Water- 
soaked patches that turn brown, dry, and papery 
are symptoms of late blight. In wet weather 
the patches may develop a ring of white mold. 
Stems may have blackened areas. Infected fruit 
have large, irregular, firm, greasy-looking brown 
spots. This fungal disease often occurs during 
periods of humid weather with cool nights 
(below 60°F) and warm days (70°-85°F). Spray 
plants with compost tea to help prevent fur­
ther symptom development, or with copper if 
the disease is severe. Prevent problems by 
planting tolerant cultivars such as ‘Pieraline’.
If the patches develop into circular, dark 
spots with light centers peppered with dark 
specks, suspect Septoria leaf spot, another 
fungal disease. Older leaves are affected first. 
Spray plants with copper to prevent further 
symptom development. Spraying transplants 
with an antitranspirant may help prevent Sep­
toria. However, don’t spray with antitranspirant 
when tomatoes are blooming heavily.
Leaves with dark, concentrically ringed 
spots. Cause: Early blight. Lower leaves and 
stems affected first. See page 229 for an illus­
tration of this fungal disease, also known as 
Alternaria blight. Disease occurs when plants 
are loaded with fruit and during humid, warm 
(75°-85°F) weather. Spray infected plants with 
copper and/or sulfur to prevent further dis­
ease development. Prevent problems by plant­
ing resistant cultivars such as ‘Kotlas’. Spraying 
transplants with an antitranspirant may help 
to prevent this disease.
Leaves with brown edges. Cause: Bacte­
rial canker. Lower leaves wilt and curl up; 
stems develop light-colored streaks and are 
brown and mealy inside. See page 229 for an 
illustration of this disease. Destroy infected 
plants. To prevent problems, presoak seed in 
10 percent bleach solution, and avoid wound­
ing plants. Don't touch plants when they are 
wet to avoid spreading the disease.
Leaves with small holes. Cause: Flea 
beetles. Young transplants are the most 
susceptible. These tiny black, brown, or bronze 
insects hop when disturbed. Treat plants with 
a commercial pyrethrin spray or dust if infes­
tation is severe. Protect transplants with row 
cover until they start to flower.
Leaves with large, ragged holes or leaves 
missing. Causes: Colorado potato beetles; 
homworms: other caterpillars. Colorado potato 
beetles are yellowish orange, oval, hard-shelled, 
'//' long beetles with black stripes. Larvae are 
soft-bodied, humpbacked, dark orange grubs 
with a row of black spots down each side of 
their bodies. Eggs are orange and laid in rows 
on undersides of leaves. Severe infestations 
can defoliate plants. Handpick insects or spray 
plants with BTSD if young larvae are feeding.
Homworms are 3"-4‘/2" caterpillars with 
white diagonal stripes. The tobacco homworm 
has a red horn projecting from the rear, while 
the tomato homworm has a black horn. See 
page 229 for an illustration of these pests. Hand- 
pick or spray plants with BTK to control them. 
Do not spray if caterpillars are covered with 
small, white, cigar-shaped projections, which 
are actually parasitic wasp cocoons.
Other caterpillars, such as cabbage loop- 
ers and beet armyworms, sometimes feed on 
tomato leaves. Handpick or spray plants with 
BTK if many caterpillars are feeding.
Flower and Fruit Problems
Few flowers form; flowers may drop with­
out setting fruit. Causes: Excess nitrogen;

232 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
shading; extreme temperatures; drought stress. 
Plants with excess nitrogen are dark green 
and vigorous, but produce few flowers. Wait 
for flowers to form. Prevent problems by avoid­
ing high-nitrogen soil amendments.
Tomatoes need at least 6 hours of sun a 
day to produce flowers; prevent problems by 
not planting them in shaded areas.
Temperatures over 100° or below 55°F 
can damage flowers and cause them to fall 
without setting fruit. Wait for new flowers to 
form. Protect plants with row cover until night 
temperatures remain above 55°E
Dry soil may also cause blossom drop. 
Keep soil evenly moist, but not soggy, and do 
not allow it to dry out.
Fruit with large, faded or gray-white, sunken 
patches. Cause: Sunscald. Green or ripe fruit 
can be affected. Control leaf diseases to pre­
vent defoliation so fruit will be shaded and 
protected from direci sun.
Fruit gnarled and malformed with dry 
scars near the blossom end. Cause: Cold injury. 
Cat-facing, as this symptom is also called, is 
caused by prolonged cool weather during 
blossoming. Poor pollination may be partially 
responsible. Protect plants with row cover until 
nights remain above 55°E
Fruit ripens unevenly and has grayish yel­
low blotches. Cause: Graywall. Green fruit 
has grayish skin blotches and interior is 
discolored. Ripe fruit has green or brown areas 
in interior. This condition can be caused by 
dense shade from crowded plants, cool tem­
peratures (below 60°F) during ripening, wet 
or compacted soil, excess nitrogen, potassium 
deficiency, or various diseases, including 
tobacco mosaic virus. Prevent problems by 
providing good growing conditions.
Fruit with green, water-soaked spots. 
Cause: Late blight. Spots expand into large, 
greasy-looking, brown areas but remain firm. 
See “Leaves with dark, water-soaked patches" 
on page 231 for controls.
Fruit with pale yellow spots just under the 
skin; spots may have a central puncture. Cause: 
Stink bugs. Flesh under spots is white and 
spongy. These brown, tan. gray, or green, W  
long, shield-shaped bugs inject a toxin when 
they feed on green fruit. Many species of weeds 
are also host plants. Keep garden well-weeded 
to prevent problems.
Fruit with small, raised spots. Causes: 
Bacterial canker; bacterial spot; bacterial speck. 
If spots are tan with white margins and look 
like "bird's eyes”, the plants are suffering from 
bacterial canker. See "Leaves with brown edges’' 
on page 231 for controls.
If spots are brown, scabby, and rough 
with sunken centers, the plants have bacterial 
spot. If spots are tiny, dark brown, and sur­
rounded with white borders, the plants have 
bacterial speck. See “Leaves with small dark 
spots’’ on page 231 for controls.
Fruit with concentrically ringed, sunken 
spots. Causes: Anthracnose; early blight. If 
these spots appear on ripe fruit, and fruit 
eventually rots, the problem is probably 
anthracnose. See page 229 for an illustration 
of this disease. Keep plants dry when watering 
to prevent spread. Pick fruit promptly, as over­
ripe fruit is more susceptible. Spray plants 
with copper when first fruit develops if you 
have had problems in the past.
Spots that appear near the stem while 
fruit is green are symptoms of early blight. See 
“Leaves with dark, concentrically ringed spots” 
on page 231 for controls.
Fruit with black, sunken area at blossom 
end. Cause: Blossom end rot. Seen on green 
or ripe fruit. First fruit to ripen is more likely 
to be affected than fruit that ripens later. See 
page 229 for an illustration of this problem. 
This condition is due to calcium deficiency in 
the fruit. It is aggravated by drought or uneven 
soil moisture, root damage, high salt levels in 
the soil, and excess nitrogen. If soil test indi­
cates deficiency, add high-calcium lime to the

TREES, SHRUBS. AND VINES ■ 
233
soil. Prevent problems by keeping soil evenly 
moist and by spraying plants with seaweed 
extract when the first flowers open and again 
when green fruit is visible.
Fruit with cracks around the stems; shoul­
ders may be green or yellow. Cause: Uneven 
irrigation. Cracks start at the stem and extend 
out. or are semi-circular splits on the shoul­
ders of the fruit. Rots may invade fruit through 
cracks. Prevent problems by keeping soil evenly 
moist throughout the season and by planting 
crack-resistant cultivars such as 'Early G irl\ 
‘Jet Star, and ‘Roma.
Ripe fruit rots. Cause: Various fungal 
and bacterial diseases. Remove infected fruit 
from plants. Stake plants to keep them off the 
ground and mulch to prevent soil from splash­
ing up on fruit. Keep plants dry when water­
ing and avoid touching them when wet. Grow 
crack-resistant cultivars and harvest ripe fruit 
promptly. Spray plants with copper after fruit 
forms if rots have been a problem in the past 
and weather is warm and wet.
Fruit with narrow, black tunnels through 
flesh and small holes near stem. Cause: Tomato 
pinworms. Larvae are small and gray and may 
have reddish markings. Destroy infested fruit. 
Till soil after harvest to prevent pests from 
overwintering.
Fruit with small holes on surface; interior 
rotted and hollow. Cause: Tomato fruitworms. 
Fruit appears to collapse like a deflated balloon. 
Larvae of tomato fruitworm, also called corn 
earworm. are light yellow, green, pink, or brown 
and grow up to 2" long with spines and length­
wise stripes. See page 229 for an illustration of 
this pest. Once larvae are inside fruit, there is 
nothing to do but destroy the infested fruit. If 
you see larvae feeding on leaves before attack­
ing fruit, spray plants with BTK to control. 
Prevent eggs from being laid on plants by 
covering them with row cover until they flower.
Green fruit with large, chewed holes. 
Cause: Homworms; Colorado potato beetles;
other caterpillars. Ripe fruit may have brown, 
calloused pits. See ‘‘Leaves with large, ragged 
holes or leaves missing" on page 231 for descrip­
tions and controls.
Ripe fruit with large, chewed holes. 
Causes: Slugs and snails; various animal pests. 
Slugs and snails can eat into a tomato quite 
rapidly. They often leave a shiny slime trail on 
the plant or ground marking their passage. 
Slugs hide under objects during the day. Place 
inverted flowerpots around the garden, check 
them daily, and destroy slugs hiding under 
them.
Various furry pests like tomatoes, too. 
See "Stopping Animal Pests" on page 408 for 
controls.
Trees, Shrubs, 
and Vines
Controlling pests and diseases on land­
scape plants is largely a matter of common 
sense and simple preventive measures. Choos­
ing the right plants and supplying their simple 
needs will help make pest control a minimal 
part of your gardening chores.
Searching Out Stress
When your plants are showing signs of 
insects or disease, the first step to control is 
figuring out what attracted the problem in the 
first place. Plants stressed by any of several 
causes, like drought, extreme cold, or soil com­
paction, are most prone to insects and disease.
The solution to these problems often 
depends on your identifying the stress that is 
weakening the plant. Once you know the source

234 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
of the stress, you can take steps to control it. 
Sometimes it’s easy to determine what's caus­
ing the problem. During dry spells, for instance, 
lack of water is an obvious possibility. Other 
noticeable stresses include wounds caused 
by equipment or root damage from construc­
tion activity.
In other cases, the initial problem may be 
more subtle. Plants growing near streets and 
walkways are often damaged in winter by the 
de-icing salts that are washed into the soil, 
although symptoms may not appear until spring.
Topping means trouble. Topping, or cutting 
tree limbs back drastically to the main branches, 
can expose trees to a wide range of problems. 
The large wounds heal slowly and provide a 
perfect entrance point for diseases. Many 
insect pests are attracted to the wealth of 
succulent shoots that sprout from the stumps.
Keep your eyes open for potential problems, 
and you may be able to minimize the damage 
to your plants before pests or diseases attack.
Getting a Good Start
When you are buying new plants, you 
can avoid a lot of future problems by choosing 
locally adapted plants or resistant cultivars. 
Plants that are native to an area are often less 
prone to problems because they are growing 
in the environment to which they are best 
adapted. Read about the plants you intend to 
buy, and avoid very pest-prone species. If you 
have your heart set on a plant that is espe­
cially vulnerable to some problem, consider 
buying a resistant cultivar if one is available. 
Look for this information in catalogs, or ask 
your local nursery owner or extension agent 
for more information on the plants best adapted 
to your area.
Once you get your plant home, some 
basic care will help it get established quickly. 
Good soil preparation will provide the ideal 
conditions for strong root development. Pro­
viding ample water for the first few years after 
planting also encourages vigorous growth. A 
2"-3" thick layer of organic mulch helps keep 
the soil moist and weeds down; just be sure to 
keep the mulch a few inches away from the 
trunk or main stem to discourage animal and 
insect pests from attacking the base of the 
plant. Do any necessary pruning or staking 
carefully, and avoid making wounds in the 
stems with lawn mowers or string trimmers.
Choosing a Control
If a problem does require control, try the 
least drastic solution, like handpicking insects 
or pruning off diseased parts. Observing your 
plants often will help you catch problems be­
fore they require more severe controls.
When dealing with large plants like trees, 
realize that controlling insect and disease prob­
lems may be impractical. If the tree is other­

TREES. SHRUBS, AND VINES ■ 
235
Treating tree wounds. Wounds in tree bark, 
caused by equipment or animals, are an easy 
target for pests and diseases. Treat the wound 
by using a sharp knife to smooth the wound 
edges and shape the area into an elliptical 
form. This promotes the development of callus 
tissue and helps the wound close quickly.
wise healthy, most disorders will not cause 
permanent damage. To deal with serious infes­
tations or infections on large plants, consider 
getting the advice of your local extension agent 
or a qualified tree-care professional; this is 
especially true before attempting a drastic 
control, like removing the plant.
Below is a discussion of some of the most 
common insect and disease problems on trees, 
shrubs, and vines.
Proper pruning cuts. You can help your plants 
stay healthy and vigorous by using correct 
pruning techniques. Always make your pruning 
cuts on a 45-degree angle just above a bud. 
Cutting too close may damage or kill the bud.
If you cut too far above the bud, the cut may 
not heal over, and the wounded tissue is an easy 
target for disease spores.
Leaf Problems 
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause; 
Aphids. These '/u'-'/s”, pear-shaped, green, 
pink, black, dusty gray, or white fluffy-coated 
insects cluster on leaves, buds, and young 
stems. As they feed, they drop sticky honey­
dew on lower leaves. Sooty mold fungi often 
grow on the honeydew on aphid-infested 
foliage —as well as on the plants growing 
beneath them; see “Leaves with black coat­

236 ■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING P1AMT GUIDE
ing" below for more information. Heavy infes­
tations may result in summer leaf drop. Avoid 
overfeeding, which promotes succulent growth 
attractive to aphids. Spray plants vigorously 
with water, several times a day for 2-3 days to 
knock off the pests. If that doesn't control 
them, spray them every 2-3 days with insecti­
cidal soap until the pests are under control. 
Use pyrethrin as a last resort.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. These tiny, spiderlike 
pests generally feed on the undersides of plant 
leaves. They suck sap from plant leaves, ini­
tially causing a yellow flecking on the upper 
leaf surfaces. Severe infestations can cause 
leaves to turn yellow or white; damaged leaves 
will eventually turn brown and drop. Tiny 
webs may be evident on leaves and stem tips. 
The leaf damage these pests cause may stunt 
the growth of the plant. Control spider mites 
by spraying plants thoroughly with water (espe­
cially the undersides of the leaves) 2-3 times a 
day for several days. For severe infestations, 
spray plants with insecticidal soap, or pyre­
thrin as a last resort.
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars. 
Several kinds feed on foliage, including tent 
caterpillars and webworms. Control all of these 
pests by manually destroying their nests or 
egg cases, spraying leaves with BTK at the 
first sign of damage, or. as a last resort, apply­
ing pyrethrin spray.
Plant defoliated. Cause: Gypsy moths. 
Gypsy moth larvae are up to 2l/2n long, gray- 
brown, hairy caterpillars with red and blue 
spots on their backs. Unlike tent caterpillars 
and webworms, gypsy moth larvae do not 
make webs.
These caterpillars feed mainly at night 
and crawl down the trunk every morning. To 
trap them on their way back up the tree, wrap 
a wide piece of burlap around the trunk, tie it 
in the center, and fold over the top half. Check
the band every afternoon, and collect and 
destroy the larvae that are trapped there. From 
late April through mid-June, spray leaves with 
BTK every 10-14 days and after each rain to 
provide more widespread control. The whit­
ish adult female moth lays eggs in tan masses 
on trunks and branches. In winter, crush the 
egg masses or scrape them into a bucket of 
soapy water.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. These pests are actu­
ally V /'-l". brown caterpillars, although you’ll 
seldom see them. They feed from inside bags 
they create out of silk and the leaves of what­
ever plant they’re feeding on. That’s why the 
bags look different on maples, for example, 
than they do on pine or spruce trees. On some 
needle-leaf evergreens, you might even mis­
take the bags for cones at first glance.
Handpick and destroy the bags; as soon 
as you notice the caterpillars, start a program 
of spraying with BTK applied every 10 days 
(or after a heavy rain) through midsummer.
Leaves skeletonized. Causes: Japanese 
beetles; sawflies. Japanese beetles have metal­
lic blue-green bodies with bronze wing covers. 
Besides feeding on leaves, the adult beetles 
often chew on buds and flowers.
Pheromone traps are available, but they 
are most helpful if you can convince your 
neighbors to use them, too; otherwise, your 
traps may just attract beetles from their yards 
into yours. Apply milky disease spores to your 
lawn for long-term larval control. Handpick 
in early morning (when the beetles move more 
slowly) if there are only a few.
Sawflies may also cause similar damage. 
They are closely related to bees and wasps. 
The larvae are the most destructive stage, 
feeding on and skeletonizing plant leaves or 
completely defoliating the plant. They range 
in size from ‘A" to 1 Vi" and often closely resem­
ble caterpillars, although sawfly larvae have 
more than 5 pairs of "legs.” Damage may occur

TREKS. SHRUBS. AND VINES ■ 
237
throughout the summer because different spe­
cies feed at different limes. Control larvae as 
soon as you spot them by handpicking or 
spraying leaves with insecticidal soap. Use 
pyrethrin for severe infestations.
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. The 
larvae of some flies, moths, sawflies. and bee­
tles feed in between upper and lower leaf 
surfaces; these pests are collectively known 
as leafminers. They may cause narrow, curved 
tunnels in the leaves or large, silvery brown 
blotches. Severe infestations can cause leaves 
to brown and wilt or drop. The most effective 
control is handpicking and destroying infested 
leaves. Sprays and dusts are usually ineffec­
tive because the larvae are protected within 
the leaves for most of their lives.
Leaves with black coating. Cause: Sooty 
mold. This fungus grows on the sugary, sticky 
honeydew produced by aphids, scales, white­
flies, and mealybugs. The black fungal coat­
ing doesn't harm leaves directly, but it does 
shade the leaves and reduce growth. The best 
control is to deal with the pests that are pro­
ducing the honeydew. Determine what pests 
your plant has and apply the appropriate 
control. (If the plant itself doesn’t show signs 
of pest damage, the honeydew may be drip­
ping down from an overhanging plant.) On 
small plants, you can wipe the leaves with a 
damp cloth to remove the honeydew and 
the mold.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. A 
large number of fungi and bacteria cause spots 
on plant leaves, in a variety of colors, shapes, 
and sizes. In some cases the spots may spread 
to cover entire leaves, stunting plant growth. 
Other leaf spots have centers that die and fall 
out of the leaf, giving a “shothole" effect.
Fortunately, the same controls are effec­
tive against many leaf spot diseases. Pick off 
infected leaves. Rake up and destroy fallen 
leaves and branches in autumn to eliminate 
overwintering spores. To prevent the spread
of mild infections, spray leaves with bordeaux 
mix; repeat twice at 10-day intervals.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. Commonly attack­
ing the foliage of many kinds of plants, pow­
dery mildew may also appear on buds and shoot 
tips. Although it is unsightly, this fungal dis­
ease seldom causes serious damage. especially 
if it occurs late in the season. Reduce the 
chances of disease by leaving plenty of room 
around plants for good air circulation. Clean 
up and destroy or dispose of infected leaves.
Leaves yellow and wilt. Cause: Root rot. 
Root rots are caused by various species of 
fungi. Besides the common leaf symptoms, 
root rots can also cause reduced growth, branch 
dieback, and the ultimate death of the plant. 
At the soil level, the stem wood may be dis­
colored, or stringlike fungal structures may be 
present. Yellow-orange mushrooms sometimes 
appear at the base of dying trees. Remove 
infected trees as soon as possible to reduce 
the spread of the fungus to other trees.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. As they 
feed, these tiny pests cover themselves with 
V,o" long shells in a range of shapes and colors. 
Some scales have hard, shiny shells, others 
form cottony, white coatings. These insects 
often feed on the undersides of the leaves, 
causing a generally unhealthy plant appearance 
and yellowish blotches on the upper leaf 
surfaces. Other types of scales feed on twigs 
and branches. Sooty mold fungi often grow on 
the honeydew on scale-infested foliage —as 
well as on the plants growing beneath them: 
see “Leaves with black coating” above for 
more information.
If possible, scrape off minor infestations 
of scale with your fingernail. Prune out badly 
infested growth, or use a soft brush and soapy 
water to gently scrub the scales off the stems 
(if the plant isn’t too bushy or spiny.) Apply a 
dormant oil spray to the trunk and branches

258 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
before growth starts in spring, or a superior oil 
during the growing season.
Trunk and Branch Problems
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. Numerous 
borers attack woody plants, mining the inner 
bark and wood of branches and trunk. To 
make plants less susceptible to attack, keep 
them healthy with proper pruning, mulching, 
and watering (during drought). Avoid wound­
ing bark unnecessarily. Be especially careful 
when using a lawn mower or string trimmer 
around trunks of woody plants. Prune off borer- 
infested branches. If you see borer holes in 
your trees, probe into them with a flexible 
wire or inject a solution of parasitic nema­
todes: after treatment, seal holes with putty.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. Several 
kinds of fungi cause cankers on twigs, trunk, 
and branches. As they spread, these sunken 
areas can girdle stems, killing the branch tips 
and stunting growth.
Mildly affected plants may recover from 
an attack of this fungus. Remove and destroy 
affected branches. If possible, cut away and 
destroy the cankered area, along with 2” of 
healthy bark around the edge of the damaged 
area. Heavily diseased plants cannot be cured 
and should be removed and destroyed. The 
best prevention is to provide good growing 
conditions; healthy plants resist attacks. Avoid 
damaging plants with lawn mowers, string 
trimmers, or pruning tools; wounds are a com­
mon place for cankers to start.
Trunk or roots with swollen, wartlike 
growths. Cause: Crown gall. This bacterial 
disease causes wartlike swellings on plant roots, 
stems, or branches. It can enter the plant 
through wounds caused by lawn-maintenance 
equipment or chewing insects. If the plant is 
only slightly infected, prune out diseased 
growth. Afterward, disinfect your pruners with
a 10 percent bleach solution (1 part bleach to
9 parts water). Destroy severely infected plants. 
This disease remains viable in the soil for 
several years without a host, so avoid replant­
ing susceptible plants, such as euonymus and 
forsythia, in that area.
Trunk with shelflike growths. Cause: 
Wood rots. Wood rots near the base of the 
tree, caused by various species of fungus, are 
indicated by the appearance of shelflike 
growths. Prevent the disease by maintaining 
general health and treating injuries to the 
tree. Once established over a large area of 
the trunk, there is little that can be done; 
remove the tree.
Whole Plant Symptoms
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac­
nose. This fungal disease is particularly a prob­
lem in cool, wet springs. In severe cases, twigs 
die back and defoliation can occur. Gather 
and dispose of fallen diseased leaves, and cut 
off affected branches several inches below the 
damaged area. A single spraying with bor­
deaux mix should provide control on young 
trees. No control is needed on larger trees; 
they’ll produce new healthy leaves when the 
weather becomes warmer and drier.
Leaves yellow, sparse, distorted, or with 
brown edges; branches die; growth stunted. 
Cause: Decline. Decline does not refer to a 
particular pest or disease organism; rather, it 
relates to a general loss of plant vigor that is 
not due to a specific cause. It is usually a 
result of a number of stresses acting on a tree 
over a period of years. Plants that are mis­
matched to their sites, soil compaction, root 
damage, trunk injuries, repeated attack by 
insects or disease, and improper pruning are 
among the factors that can cause stressed plants 
and lead to decline.
If you can identify and eliminate the 
sources of the problem, you may be able to

TREES, SHRUBS. AND VINES ■ 
239
restore the plant's health. A seriously weak­
ened plant may be too far gone for recovery, 
and you’ll need to remove it. If you have iden­
tified the source of the original problem and 
have taken steps to resolve it, consider replant­
ing with a suitable species.
Whole plant stunted and lacking vigor. 
Cause: Nematodes. Plant-parasitic species of 
these microscopic, wormlike creatures attack 
the roots and make plants look sickly and 
stunted. If you dig up the plant, you may find 
knotlike galls on the roots. The best control 
measures are preventive: Mulch regularly with 
compost or other organic mulch to ensure 
that soil organic matter levels remain high. 
When preparing soil for an entire bed or shrub 
border, incorporate plenty of compost into 
the soil. Do not amend the soil in individual 
planting holes: See the illustration "Proper 
Planting" at right for recommendations. Re­
move seriously infected plants and avoid replac­
ing them with nematode-susceptible species 
(contact your local extension office for 
recommendations).
Whole tree falls over. Cause: Windthrow. 
If an otherwise healthy tree suddenly falls 
over, roots and all, the problem may be due to 
improper planting. The roots of trees planted 
in small holes and backfilled with heavily 
amended soils may not extend out of the plant­
ing area in search of nutrients. The small root 
system that develops may not be enough to 
anchor the tree if a sudden strong wind gust 
comes along.
To avoid damage, follow the guidelines 
given in the illustration “Proper Planting’’ at 
right. If windthrow does happen to a young 
tree, you may be able to save the plant. While 
the roots are exposed, use your fingers or a 
tool to gently loosen the congested root mass. 
Loosen the soil to a depth of about 8", in a 
circle a few feet out from the trunk. Then 
carefully pull the tree upright, and stake it on 
several sides to hold it upright. Water the tree
Proper planting. Following a few simple plant­
ing tricks will get your plants off to a good start. 
First, dig a wide but shallow planting area. 
Ideally, the tree should rest on undisturbed 
soil, with the top of the root ball the same level 
at which it was growing in the nursery. Scratch 
the sides of the hole with a spading fork to 
loosen the soil and encourage root penetration. 
Don t add peat moss or other amendments to 
the hole; simply replace the original soil, water 
thoroughly, and apply a 2"-3" layer of mulch.
thoroughly, and mulch well with compost to 
promote new root growth.
Leaves yellow; growth stunted; top of plant 
breaks off from roots. Cause: Graft incom­
patibility. This problem occurs when the root 
system and the top of a grafted plant do not 
join properly. This lack of connection inter­
feres with the flow of water and nutrients, and

240 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
the top of the plant may die and break off at 
the graft union. This problem most commonly 
occurs within a few months of grafting, but it 
can also happen after several years of appar­
ently healthy growth. Fortunately, this prob­
lem does not happen often. If your plant is 
damaged, remove it; there is no cure.
Tropaeolum
Nasturtium. Annuals.
Available in all shades of red, yellow, 
orange, and white, these easy-to-grow plants 
thrive in warm, sunny weather. Flowers are 2" 
wide, highly visible, and born singly. Some 
cultivars have a bushy habit; others climb 
quickly if given any type of support. Other­
wise, they sprawl along the ground with a 1 '-6' 
wide spread.
Direct-sow nasturtium seeds in late spring: 
they germinate in 1-2 weeks. Plants prefer 
sun. but some afternoon shade is beneficial in 
very hot areas. They are not fussy about the 
soil conditions, but too much fertilizer encour­
ages ample foliage growth and fewer flowers. 
Space plants 8" apart. Water only as needed, 
to prevent wilting.
Problems
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. For controls, see “Leaves, stems, and 
buds distorted" on page 20.
Leaves with tan or brown blotches or ser­
pentine tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. See 
“Leaves with tan or brown blotches or serpen­
tine tunnels" on page 27 for controls.
Plant yellows, wilts, and dies. Cause: 
Bacterial wilt. The stems have black streaks, 
and roots will rot. There is no cure. Avoid
planting nasturtiums near other susceptible 
crops, such as eggplants, tomatoes, or peppers. 
Solarize the soil before replanting with sus­
ceptible plants.
Leaves with many tiny holes. Cause: Rea 
beetles. Infested leaves quickly dry out and 
may wither. These tiny black, brown, or bronze 
insects hop readily when disturbed. Keep nas­
turtiums sufficiently watered. Eliminate gar­
den debris where flea beetles reside. Spray 
serious infestations with pyrethrin.
Tsuga
Hemlock. Trees.
Hemlocks are narrow-leaved, evergreen, 
cone-bearing trees. Often used as attractive 
hedges, they can be allowed to grow naturally 
or be sheared to any height and width.
Hemlocks are best adapted to moist, cool 
climates. They are shallow-rooted and easily 
transplanted: set out in spring as balled-and- 
burlapped plants. Hemlocks prefer moist, acid 
soil rich in organic matter. They will flourish 
in sun or partial shade; if planted in sun. make 
sure to water during drought.
Problems
Leaves drop; plant weak or dead. Cause: 
Hemlock woolly adelgids. The most notice­
able sign of this pest is the cottony, white egg 
masses that appear in late winter and early 
spring. The white-fringed nymphs emerge in 
early spring and feed on twigs and leaf bases 
throughout the summer; the mature adelgids 
then overwinter and repeat the cycle. Control 
by spraying the trunk and branches in early 
spring (before growth starts) with dormant oil 
to reduce the population of overwintering

Tl'IJPA ■ 241
adults. Repeat the spray in June and October 
with insecticidal soap or superior oil.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. Several kinds 
of scale attack hemlocks. For information on 
controlling these pests, see “Leaves yellow; 
stems and leaves covered with small bumps" 
on page 237.
Branches with brown tips. Cause: 
Spruce budworms. For more information, see 
“Branches with brown tips" on page 181.
Plant defoliated. Causes: Hemlock loop- 
ers; gypsy moths. The 1" long, greenish yellow, 
black-spotted hemlock loopers usually appear 
in June. They feed on the needles, starting from 
the branch tips and working toward the cen­
ter of the plant. Handpick small populations: 
control large infestations with BTK.
Gypsy moths cause similar damage; for a 
description and control measures, see "Plant 
defoliated” on page 236.
Plant defoliated; branches bear cocoonlike 
bags. Cause: Bagworms. See “Plant defoli­
ated; branches bear cocoon like bags” on page
236.
Leaves light gray or bronze. Cause: 
Spruce spider mites. See “Leaves light gray or 
bronze" on page 181 for controls.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. See “Trunk 
or branches with small holes; limbs die or 
break off' on page 238 for details.
Branch tips die back. Causes: Blight; sun 
scorch; drought stress. Blight, a fungal disease, 
attacks mostly during cool, wet weather. Good 
air circulation among trees discourages its 
onset. Leaves of infected plants shrivel and 
twigs die back. Cut off and destroy dead or 
diseased wood. In a very cool, wet spring, you 
can spray with bordeaux mix. starting when 
new growth appears on the trees and repeat­
ing at 2-week intervals until the weather gets 
warmer and drier.
If you see the same symptoms during hot.
dry weather, your hemlock may be suffering 
from sun scorch or drought stress. Minimize 
damage by watering deeply and regularly dur­
ing dry periods. A thick mulch may also help 
by retaining moisture and keeping roots cool.
Leaves yellow and drop. Cause: Rust. 
Whitish blisters on the undersides of the leaves, 
followed by yellowing and leaf drop, indicates 
rust. Prune out and destroy infected branch 
tips. To prevent the spread of the disease, 
spray with sulfur, repeating 2 or 3 times at 
weekly intervals.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. See 
“Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; branch 
tips die back" on page 238 for details.
Tulipa
Tulip. Bulbs.
Perhaps the best-loved of the spring- 
flowering bulbs, tulips have been admired and 
prized for centuries. Plant breeders have devel­
oped thousands of hybrids and cultivars from 
the more than 100 species in this genus. Divided 
into 15 divisions, based on bloom time, flower 
form, and parentage, tulips bear cup-shaped 
blossoms on 6 "-24" tall flower stalks. Flowers 
come in all colors except true blue; bicolors 
are common. Thick, 6"-8" long, straplike leaves 
surround flower stems.
Hardy bulbs, tulips require winter chill­
ing to bloom. Where temperatures don’t fall 
low enough, several weeks in a refrigerator at 
40°F provides the necessary cold period. In 
cold-winter climates, plant tulips in fall, at 
least 1 month before the ground freezes. Keep 
bulbs cool until planting; exposure to temper­
atures over 70°F reduces flower size. Plant

242 ■ PROBLEMSOLVING PLANTGUDE
6 "-10" deep in full sun and well-drained soil. 
Poor drainage promotes bulb rots. Mulch lightly 
in winter. Top-dress with compost and bonemeal 
in spring, about 1 month before bloom. Remove 
spent flowers to promote bulb growth. As 
clumps enlarge, flower size may decline. Dig 
crowded clumps after foliage fades, shake off 
loose soil, and air-dry bulbs in shade for a 
few days. Divide offsets and parent bulbs 
and replant.
Problems
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. Slugs and snails may feed on 
foliage; see “Leaves with large, ragged holes'* 
on page 50 for controls.
Leaves yellow or distorted; bulbs decayed. 
Cause: Bulb mites. These mites may arrive on 
new bulbs. See “Leaves yellow or distorted; 
bulbs decayed” on page 50 for controls.
Plant fails to appear in spring; bulbs 
missing. Cause: Animal pests. Rodents like 
to feed on tulip bulbs; droppings or disturbed 
soil may appear in flower beds. Plant bulbs 
where human activity will discourage wild­
life; pet cats or dogs also deter animal pests. 
Line planting beds with hardware cloth to ex­
clude burrowing rodents; cover beds with screen 
wire in winter. Try repellents such as dried 
blood, human hair, or garlic sprays. Keep flower 
beds free of debris where pests may hide.
Leaves yellow; plant stunted. Cause: 
Tulip bulb aphids. These aphids infest both 
the bulbs and aboveground portions of the 
plant. They suck sap from leaves, stems, and 
flowers, causing foliage to curl, pucker, and 
yellow. Rower buds may be stunted. Inspect 
bulbs carefully before you buy; look for clus­
ters of gray, waxy aphids under the bulb coat. 
Spray infested plants with insecticidal soap. 
Destroy seriously infested bulbs or try dust­
ing them with pyrethrin.
Leaves streaked or spotted; flowers rotted. 
Cause: Botrytis blight. Also known as tulip
fire, this fungus causes red-brown leaf spots 
that later turn gray. Plants may be stunted or 
pale yellow-green with deformed flowers and 
rotting stems. Dark spots form on bulbs; gray 
mold may be present. Dig and destroy infected 
plants. Limit disease spread by watering early 
in the day so leaves have time to dry before 
evening. Trim off leaves as soon as they turn 
yellow; remove spent flowers. To protect tulips, 
apply bordeaux mix when shoots appear in 
spring: repeat 1 week later.
Leaves and flowers streaked or mottled; 
foliage spindly or deformed. Cause: Viral 
diseases. Several viruses infect tulips. Some 
tulip cultivars gel their flower color from viral 
infections; the resulting blooms are said to be 
broken. Aphids and leafhoppers may spread 
virus from broken tulips to solid-colored ones 
and also to lilies. Viruses weaken tulips with­
out killing them; remove infected plants to 
halt disease spread to healthy tulips. Wash 
tools used around infected plants; control suck­
ing insects; see “Leaves, stems, and buds 
distorted, sticky: clusters of small insects” on 
page 51 for information on controlling aphids.
Turnip
Brassica rapa 
Rapifera group (Cruciferae)
Turnips are a cool-season vegetable grown 
for their crisp roots and tasty greens. They 
require cool, moist, rich soil with a pH between 
5.5 and 6.8. Plant seed directly in the garden. 
Turnips grow best between 60° and 65°F They 
grow poorly above 750E but will tolerate tem­
peratures as low as 40°E Harvest greens and 
roots when they are small and tender.
Turnips are in the same family as cabbage

ULMUS ■ 
243
and are troubled by many of the same pests 
and diseases. See the Cabbage entry beginning 
on page 52 for descriptions and controls.
Root Problems
Roots are riddled with slimy, winding 
tunnels. Cause: Cabbage maggots. Maggots 
are white and lA" long. See “Leaves yellow; 
plant stunted; plant wilts on bright, hot days" 
on page 54 for description and controls.
Root flesh black but firm; skin rough and 
cracked. Cause: Downy mildew. Control this 
fungal disease by spraying plants with a baking- 
soda-and-soap spray (1 teaspoon baking soda, 
1 teaspoon liquid dish soap, 1 quart water) or 
copper if you have had problems in the past.
Prevent problems by planting tolerant culti­
vars such as ‘Crawford’ and ‘Scarlet Queen 
Hybrid'.
Roots black and rotted. Cause: Black 
rot. Leaves have yellow, V-shaped spots on 
margins. Destroy infected plants. Prevent this 
bacterial disease by treating seed with 122°F 
water for 25 minutes before planting. (Be aware 
that this treatment can injure seed viability; 
for complete instructions, see page 422.)
Roots with dry, sunken spots. Cause: 
Anthracnose. Avoid this fungal disease by plant­
ing in cool soil (early spring or fall).
Roots with small, water-soaked spots or pits 
on surface. Cause: Cold injury. Protect plants 
with mulch if temperatures are below 30°E
lllm us
Elm. Trees.
Elms are alternate-leaved, deciduous trees 
valued for their ornamental use as specimen 
or street trees. There was a time when virtu­
ally every town and city in the northeastern 
United States was dominated by the majestic, 
vase-shaped American elm (Ulmus ameri­
cana); unfortunately, with the appearance and 
spread of Dutch elm disease (DED), many of 
them have died.
Because most elms are susceptible to so 
many insects and diseases, you might want to 
avoid using them in the landscape. If you do 
decide to grow elms, consider planting lacebark 
elm (U. parvifolia), which is more resistant to 
Dutch elm disease and elm leaf beetles. Plant 
elms in spring or fall as bare-root or balled- 
and-burlapped trees. Full sun and well-drained 
soils are best.
Copyrighted material

244 
■ 
PROBLEM SOLVING PL\NT GUIDE
Problems
Leaves with rectangular holes or skele­
tonized. Cause: Elm leaf beetles. This is a 
V*", yellow-green beetle with a dark line on 
the outer edge of each wing cover. It lays its 
eggs in spring on the undersides of leaves; 
these eggs hatch in June. One to several gener­
ations may occur each year.
Both the adults and the ’/a", black-spotted, 
yellow larvae feed on the leaves, eating every­
thing but the veins. For an illustration of the 
damage, see below. Trees are often defoliated 
and so weakened that they are susceptible to 
other insect and disease problems. Control 
beetles by spraying leaves with BTSD, partic­
ularly in June.
Leaves wilted and yellow or brown, drop 
early; branches show symptoms one at a time.
Cause: Dutch elm disease. Caused by a fungus, 
Dutch elm disease is spread by the feeding of 
elm bark beetles, and by natural root grafts 
between trees growing in the same area. Keep 
trees healthy with proper pruning, mulching, 
and watering (during drought). Quickly repair 
all wounds to help prevent insect attacks and 
subsequent infection. Once the disease is 
established, there is no effective remedy. 
Remove and immediately destroy all diseased 
or dying elms. Remove the stump if possible, 
or peel the bark off to below the soil line to 
deter elm bark beetles from feeding there.
Bark tunneled. Cause: Elm bark beetles. 
These ‘/ i o '\  dark reddish brown beetles attack 
weakened elm trees and serve as vectors of 
Dutch elm disease. The adult beetles bore 
small holes through the bark and lay eggs in
What Goes Wrong 
and Why
Larva
Adult
female
Larva
Leaves 
4,
skeletonized, 
\V  ; ,v£
Cause: C ankerw orm ^^
tf;all cankerworms lay clusters of eggs that
* 7 "  : ^resemble small flowerpots 
on twigs.
Adult
Galleries
lio* Adult
Leaves with rectangular 
\
 ' 
- 
holes or skeletonized. 
,
Cause: Elm leaf beetles. Adults chew 
holes in leaves; larvae skeletonize from 
below causing leaves to curl and dry.
/  
Bark tunneled.
Cause: Elm bark 
beetles. Adults feed in twig 
crotches, carrying Dutch elm 
disease from plant to plant

VEGETABLES 
■ 
245
the wood beneath. The eggs hatch into x/*\ 
curved, white grubs that continue to mine 
underneath the bark, creating winding tunnels, 
known as galleries. See the opposite page for 
an illustration of their damage. The grubs 
transform into adult beetles, which emerge 
through small holes in the bark. If the tree 
they emerge from was infected with DED, the 
beetles will carry the disease spores as they fly 
away to feed on other elm trees.
Make trees less attractive to beetles by 
promoting vigorous, healthy growth with proper 
pruning, mulching, and watering (during 
drought). Eliminate breeding areas by remov­
ing and destroying weak and dying trees.
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Canker- 
worms. Both spring and fall cankerworms are 
V/-1", yellow or greenish caterpillars that feed 
on the foliage of birches, often defoliating the 
tree. See the opposite page for an illustration 
of fall cankerworm. For control measures, see 
“Leaves skeletonized” on page 42.
Leaves wilted and yellow or brown, drop 
early; entire crown of tree affected. Cause: 
Phloem necrosis. In later stages, the inner 
bark (phloem) is discolored and smells faintly 
of wintergreen. This disease, also known as 
elm yellows, kills plants quickly, often in a 
single growing season. It is spread from tree to 
tree by leafhoppers.
Controlling leafhoppers by spraying 
infested plants with insecticidal soap or pyre­
thrin may reduce the spread of phloem necrosis. 
If trees are close together, however, the dis­
ease can also spread underground by means 
of natural root grafts. Once plants are infected, 
there is no control; remove and destroy infec­
ted trees.
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Japanese 
beetles. This xh" long pest has a metallic blue- 
green body and bronze wing covers. Hand- 
pick in early morning if there are only a few. 
Apply milky disease spores to your lawn for 
long-term control.
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves wrinkled and discolored” 
on page 235 for controls.
Leaves tunneled. Cause: Leafminers. R>r 
more information and controls, see “Leaves 
tunneled” on page 237.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See "Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps" on page 237 for controls.
Trunk or branches with small holes; limbs 
die or break off. Cause: Borers. For more 
information, see "Trunk or branches with small 
holes; limbs die or break off* on page 238.
Trunk or branches with oozing lesions; 
branch tips die back. Cause: Canker. For more 
information, see “Trunk or branches with ooz­
ing lesions; branch tips die back” on page 238.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots" on page 237 for controls.
Leaves with powdery white coating. 
Cause: Powdery mildew. For controls, see 
“Leaves with powdery white coating" on page
237.
Vegetables
Vegetables are plants grown for their edi­
ble roots, stems, leaves, seeds, fruit, and other 
plant parts. Most vegetables are annuals; a 
few are biennials or perennials grown as annu­
als; and some are hardy perennials. Vegeta­
bles grow best in deeply worked, well-drained 
soil with lots of organic matter. Most require 
full sun to produce well. See individual vege­
table entries for specific cultural requirements 
and problems. The following problems affect 
many vegetables.

246 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
Problems
Seedlings fall over; stems girdled or rot­
ted at soil line. Cause: Damping-off. Disin­
fect reused pots and flats by dipping them in a
10 percent bleach solution < 1 part bleach to 9 
parts water) and letting them air-dry before 
filling them with fresh seed-starting mix. Sow 
seed thinly to allow for air movement around 
seedlings. Cover seed with a thin layer of soil­
less mix or vermiculite. Water only enough to 
keep soil moist, not soggy. Thin seedlings and 
spray with compost tea as soon as first true 
leaves open to help prevent the problem.
Seedlings clipped off at soil line. Cause: 
Cutworms. Check for fat. 1" long, brown or 
gray caterpillars in the soil near the base of 
plants. Once they chew off a seedling, there is 
nothing you can do except protect the remain­
ing seedlings from nocturnal cutworm attacks. 
To prevent damage, place cutworm collars 
around transplants, sprinkle moist bran mixed 
with BTK on the soil surface in the evening, 
or add parasitic nematodes to the soil at least 
a week before planting.
Leaves turn yellow beginning at base of 
plant; plant stunted. Causes: Nitrogen defi­
ciency: waterlogged soil. Spray foliage with 
compost tea or fish-meal tea, or side-dress 
plants with compost. Waterlogged soil dam­
ages roots and prevents them from using nutri­
ents available in the soil. Prevent problems by 
choosing well-drained sites, adding organic 
matter to the soil to improve drainage, and by 
planting in raised beds.
Leaves yellow and curled; new growth 
distorted. Cause: Aphids. These small, soft- 
bodied, green, black, or pinkish insects suck 
plant juices. They may spread various dis­
eases or leave a sticky honeydew on leaves 
and fruit that in turn supports the growth of 
black, sooty mold. R>r mild infestations, knock 
pests off plants with a blast of water. Spray 
plants with insecticidal soap to control aphids, 
or with a commercial neem or pyrethrin spray 
if infestation is severe.
Leaves yellow; plant wilts; stems, crowns, 
or roots water-soaked and rotted. Cause: Fu n- 
gal or bacterial rots. Various fungi and bacte­
ria cause stem. root, or crown rot. Poor drainage 
or overwatering encourages the development 
of these diseases. Destroy infected plants or 
plant parts. Thin plants to increase air move­
ment and reduce moisture around plants. Spray 
plants with copper to prevent spread if weather 
is warm and wet and disease is severe. Plant in 
well-drained soil or in raised beds to prevent 
problems.
Plant yellow and stunted, wilts during 
bright, hot days; roots may have swollen galls.
Cause: Root knot and other pest nematodes. 
These microscopic, wormlike creatures invade 
and feed on plant roots. Pull and destroy 
infected plants. Control pest nematodes by 
adding chitin or parasitic nematodes to the 
soil. Solarize infested areas to reduce future 
problems.
Leaves yellow; plant wilts gradually.
Causes: Verticillium wilt; Fusarium wilt. Leaves 
may roll up as the disease progresses. Cut- 
open stems are discolored. Severely infected 
plants eventually die. There is no cure for 
plants with these fungal diseases. Destroy 
infected plants. There are many species of 
Fusarium. each of which infects only 1 plant 
or plant family. One species of Verticillium 
wilt, however, can infect over 300 species of 
cultivated plants including eggplants, tomatoes, 
peppers, potatoes, brambles, fruits, and orna­
mentals; so preventive rotation is difficult. 
Avoid planting wilt-susceptible plants where 
any wilt symptoms have developed within the 
last 3 years.
Leaves or other plant parts covered with 
tan to gray, fuzzy growth. Cause: Gray mold. 
This fungal disease attacks a wide range of 
edible and ornamental plants. Pick off and 
destroy moldy parts. Thin plants to increase 
air movement and reduce moisture around 
leaves, since the mold thrives in dam p 
conditions. Remove faded flowers promptly.

VERBENA 
■ 
247
Spray foliage with compost tea to control mold. 
Spray plants with sulfur to prevent further 
symptom development if the weather is wet 
and cool and the disease is severe.
Leaves with powdery white growth on 
upper surfaces. Cause: Powdery mildew. This 
symptom is caused by a number of fungi. each 
of which attacks only specific plants. Thin 
plants to increase air movement and reduce 
moisture around leaves. Spray foliage with 
compost tea to control. Spray plants with sul­
fur or bordeaux mix if disease is serious to 
prevent further symptom development.
Leaves with wandering, white or translu­
cent tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. Larvae are 
tiny white maggots that feed on leaf tissue. 
Adults are tiny black-and-yellow insects. Once 
maggots enter leaves, no spray will control 
them. Destroy mined leaves. Apply row cover 
as soon as plants emerge or are set out to 
prevent problems. Control adults with yellow 
sticky traps or a commercial pyrethrin spray 
or dust.
Leaves pale and stippled. Cause: Mites. 
Leaves may become bronzed. These tiny, 
spiderlike insects thrive in hot, dry weather 
and feed on the undersides of leaves. Spray 
plants with insecticidal soap in the evening to 
control them.
Leaves riddled with small holes. Cause: 
Rea beetles. These small, shiny, black beetles 
hop when disturbed. They can transmit viral 
and bacterial diseases. Control severe infesta­
tions by spraying plants with pyrethrin. Pre­
vent problems by protecting young plants with 
row cover.
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Causes: 
Caterpillars: snails and slugs: various animal 
pests. Many different caterpillars feed on 
vegetables. Look for dark green excrement at 
the base of leaves or plants. Handpick, or spray 
plants with BTK as soon as active caterpillars 
or feeding are observed. Let nature work for 
you and avoid handpicking or spraying if 
caterpillars are sluggish and yellowish (in­
fected with a fatal virus) or covered with the 
small, white, cigar-shaped cocoons of parasi­
tic wasps.
Slugs and snails eat leaves and fruit, often 
leaving shiny slime trails on the plants or ground 
marking their passage. Slugs hide under objects 
during the day. Place inverted flowerpots around 
the garden, check them daily, and destroy 
slugs hiding under them. If slug problems are 
severe, use a copper strip edging around beds 
to exclude them.
Various furry pests eat vegetables; see 
"Stopping Animal Pests" on page 408.
Verbena
Verbena, vervain. Annuals.
Verbenas* hardiness and long growing sea­
son make them favorites of beginners as well 
as long-time gardeners. Compact flower clus­
ters range from white to deep purples and 
reds; they bloom from summer through autumn. 
Plants grow 6"-10" tall with a spread of 1-2'. 
Use verbenas to edge beds and borders, or in 
containers and window boxes.
Where summers are short, start seeds 
indoors 3 months before last frost. Ample light 
and 70°F soil for 4 weeks are needed for 
germination. Move outdoors when night tem­
peratures are above 50°F Space I' apart. Or 
direct-seed outdoors as soon as weather warms 
up, although germination may be poor. Many 
gardeners prefer to buy nursery-grown plants.
Verbenas need full sun, average water, 
and fertile, well-drained soil. In very hot cli­
mates give light shade to prevent drought 
stress, which reduces flowering.
Problems
Leaves with powdery white patches.
Cause: Powdery mildew. See “Leaves with pow­

248 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
dery white patches' on page 19 for controls.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. For control information, 
see “Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage 
webbed” on page 18.
Branch tips wilt. Cause: Budworms. 
These Vi", greenish yellow caterpillars feed on 
new shoots. Prune and destroy infested tips.
Leaves, stems, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. See "Leaves, stems, and buds distorted” 
on page 20 for controls.
Leaves with tan or brown blotches or ser­
pentine tunnels. Cause: Leafminers. See 
“Leaves with tan or brown blotches or serpen­
tine tunnels” on page 27 for controls.
Veronica
Speedwell, brooklime. Perennials.
Ranging from prostrate to strongly upright 
in habit and from 3"-48" in height, speedwells 
form a varied genus of mostly blue-flowered, 
summer-blooming plants. Leaves are lance­
shaped and green to gray-green; numerous 
small blossoms cover tall spikes that arise from 
the plant tops or from the leaf axils. Woolly 
speedwell (Veronica incam ) is grown for its 
1 "-3", silvery white, fuzzy leaves as well as its 
blue blossoms.
Planting requirements vary somewhat 
among species but, in general, speedwells 
require average, very well drained soil and full 
sun. Plants tolerate some shade, but most do 
not appreciate drought, extreme heat, or 
humidity. Speedwell plantings enlarge via new 
shoots appearing at edges, but are not invasive. 
Divide every 4 years to reduce crowding. 
Remove spent flowers to prolong bloom.
Few insect pests attack speedwells, but
fungal diseases are likely, especially when the 
plants’ rather strict moisture requirements are 
not met. Prevent problems with good drainage, 
garden sanitation, and air circulation.
Problems
Leaves with spots or blotches. Cause: 
Various fungi. Brown, black, or yellow leaf 
spots may enlarge and kill entire leaves. Remove 
severely infected plants and plant parts. Avoid 
wetting leaves when watering. Apply sulfur 
sprays when symptoms appear to avoid fur­
ther damage.
Leaves with white or gray powdery spots 
on upper and lower surfaces. Cause: Downy 
mildew. As the fungus spreads, stems become 
distorted and die; flowers fail to open. Destroy 
severely infected plants. Sprays of sulfur or 
copper fungicide give some protection.
Viburnum
Viburnum. Shrubs and small trees.
Viburnums are opposite-leaved shrubs or 
small trees valued for their flowers, fruit, foliage, 
and growth habit. Most are deciduous; some 
are semi-evergreen or evergreen. They are excel­
lent in shrub borders or woodland plantings.
Set out in fall or spring in well-drained soil 
amply enriched with organic matter. Viburnums 
grow well in sun or partial shade. Be aware that 
sulfur-containing fungicides may harm the foli­
age of some viburnums. Test the spray on a 
few leaves before treating the whole plant.
Problems
Leaves wrinkled and discolored. Cause: 
Aphids. For control measures, see “Leaves 
wrinkled and discolored” on page 235.
Copyrighted m

VIOLA 
■ 
249
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots'* on page 237 for controls.
Leaves with powdery white coating.
Cause: Powdery mildew. For controls, see 
“Leaves with powdery white coating" on 
page 237.
Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves with 
moist or brown sunken spots. Cause: Anthrac­
nose. See “Leaves and shoots blackened; leaves 
with moist or brown sunken spots" on page 
238 for controls.
Leaves skeletonized. Cause: Japanese 
beetles. For suggested controls, see “Leaves 
skeletonized" on page 236.
Trunk or roots with swollen, wartlike 
growths. Cause: Crown gall. See “Trunk or 
roots with swollen, wartlike growths" on page 
238 for controls.
Leaves yellow; stems and leaves covered 
with small bumps. Cause: Scales. See “Leaves 
yellow; stems and leaves covered with small 
bumps” on page 237 for controls.
Vinca
Periwinkle, vinca, myrtle. Perennials.
Two species of ground-covering vines rep­
resent Vinca in the United States: Greater 
periwinkle (V major) and common periwin­
kle (V. minor). Both feature glossy, dark green, 
opposite leaves and blue, funnel-shaped flow­
ers in spring. Greater periwinkle has larger 
leaves and is hardy only to Zone 7; common 
periwinkle's foliage is smaller and plants are 
hardy to Zone 5, making it the more widely 
used landscape plant. Stems bearing flowers 
stick up 6'-18" above ground; the vines are 
otherwise prostrate. White-flowered and var­
iegated cultivars are available.
Periwinkles grow rapidly in moist, sunny 
to lightly shaded spots; roots form along stems 
touching the ground. These vines spread, but 
rarely grow out of control. Average, well-drained 
soil is fine, and periw inkles make good 
groundcovers for erosion control on slopes— 
plants tolerate light foot traffic.
In the landscape, periwinkles have few 
severe insect problems, although several pests 
trouble greater periwinkles in greenhouse or 
subtropical conditions. Wet soil causes most 
periwinkle problems by encouraging fungal 
diseases; prevent problems by selecting a site 
with good soil drainage, keeping the garden 
clean, and thinning plantings to promote air 
circulation.
Problems
Shoots blacken, wilt, and die back. Cause: 
Canker. Also known as dieback, this disease is 
caused by 2 fungal organisms and most often 
occurs during rainy weather. Prune and destroy 
infected shoots; thin plantings to improve air 
circulation. Remove and destroy severely in­
fected plants. If canker has been a problem, 
use preventive sprays of bordeaux mix.
Viola
Pansy. Biennials grown as annuals.
Colorful pansies help to brighten up the 
spring garden. The 6" tall plants bear cheerful 
blossoms in a wide color range. They bloom 
from May to July, providing a perfect comple­
ment to spring bulbs.
For very early bloom, sow pansy seeds in 
August and overwinter plants in a cold frame. 
Otherwise, sow seeds indoors in winter. Make
rial

250 
■ 
PROBIJ-M-SOIMNG PIANT Gl'IDK
sure seeds are covered; they need darkness to 
germinate. Seeds sprout in 14 days. After hard­
ening the plants off. set them out into the 
garden about a month before the last frost. 
Pansies like cool weather; rich, loose soil; and 
filtered sun. Mulching keeps roots cool. Water 
plants regularly, and apply diluted liquid fer­
tilizer every 4 weeks. Remove spent flowers 
to encourage more blooms. Cut plants back 
hard in midsummer and they may rebloom in 
the fall.
Problems
Leaves with large, ragged holes. Cause: 
Slugs and snails. For controls, see “Leaves 
with large, ragged holes* on page 18.
lea v es, stem s, and buds distorted. Cause: 
Aphids. See “Leaves, stems, and buds distorted" 
on page 20 for controls.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. See “Leaves stippled with 
yellow; foliage webbed" on page 18 for con­
trol information.
Seedlings or young plants cut off at soil 
level. Cause: Cutworms. For control mea­
sures, see “Seedlings or young plants cut off at 
soil level" on page 20.
Leaves with spots. Cause: Leaf spots. 
See “Leaves with spots" on page 19 for controls.
Walnut
Jugkms spp. (Juglandaceae)
Walnuts are large, deciduous trees bear­
ing separate male and female flowers on the 
same plant. To get the heaviest nut production, 
plant 2 different cultivars for cross-pollination. 
The most commonly grown types are black 
walnut {Juglans nigra) and English walnut
(J. regia). Walnuts are hardy in Zones 4-8.
Walnuts need a site free of late spring 
frost: they prefer deep, well-drained soil. Prune 
lightly in winter to allow sunlight into the tree 
and to remove dead, diseased, or crossing 
branches.
Problems
Immature nuts dry up and drop early.
Cause: Codling moth larvae. These fat. white 
or pinkish. 7/«" caterpillars tunnel into nuts 
and may have departed by the time you dis­
cover the damage. Nuts may have a hole filled 
with what looks like moist sawdust. Control 
codling moths with superior oil or pyrethrin. 
Late-blooming cultivars. such as ‘Hartley’ and 
‘V ina, are least susceptible to codling moths. 
For more information, see "Fruit with holes 
surrounded by brown, crumbly excrement” 
on page 22.
H usks have soft, black, sm ooth spots and 
m aggots in sid e. Cause: Walnut husk fly 
maggots. Adult walnut husk flies lay eggs in 
nut husks and these hatch into small, cream- 
colored maggots. Although the larvae never 
eat the nut shells, larval feeding in the husk 
causes shells to blacken or shrivel. Since nuts 
themselves are unaffected, you can usually 
just ignore this pest. To control the flies, col­
lect and dispose of infested husks. For severe 
infestations, capture adult flies with apple mag­
got fly traps (4 traps per tree). For information 
on apple maggot fly traps, see "Fruit dimpled: 
brown tunnels through flesh" on page 22. 
Resistant cultivars include ‘Ashley’. Erhardt’, 
‘Payne’, and ‘Placentia’.
H usks blacken; nuts blacken, shrivel, and 
drop prem aturely. Cause: Walnut blight. 
Leaves may also bear angular brown spots, 
and dead, sunken lesions may appear on shoots. 
This bacterial disease overwinters in attached 
nuts, diseased buds, and twig lesions. To con­
trol blight, keep the canopy dry by pruning to 
allow good air circulation at the centers of the 
trees. Also avoid overhead irrigation. Fbr severe

WISTERIA 
■ 
251
infection, use copper spray. Resistant culti­
vars include Hartley* and ‘Vina .
Leaves twisted or curled and covered with 
a sticky coating. Cause: Aphids. The shiny 
coating is honeydew. a substance excreted by 
feeding aphids. Leaves may show a sooty fun­
gus that feeds on honeydew. Sprays of water 
or insecticidal soap solution help control aphids. 
Pyrethrin kills aphids, but reserve this for emer­
gency use since it also kills beneficial insects. 
For more information, see "New leaves twisted 
or curled and covered with a sticky coating*’ 
on page 67.
Leaves with circular brown spots. Cause: 
Anthracnose. This fungal disease, common in 
wet. humid summers, may weaken trees and 
cause nuts to shrivel and drop early. To con­
trol anthracnose, keep trees well-nourished 
with nitrogen and clean up fallen leaves.
Tree stunted and bears yellow  leaves. 
Causes: Crown rot: blackline. If the trunk 
near the soil line is discolored or oozing sap, 
suspect crown rot. a disease caused by too 
much water and poor soil drainage. Improved 
drainage may help. If you find small holes 
or cracks at the graft union, remove some 
bark around the area and look for a black line. 
Blackline virus infects English walnuts grafted 
onto J. hindsii rootstocks. There is no cure.
Watermelon
Citrullus lanatus (Cucurbitaceae)
Watermelons belong to the same family 
as muskmelons and honeydews. See the Melon 
entry beginning on page 148 for culture and 
pest information. Harvest watermelons when 
the bottom of the fruit turns from pale yellow 
to golden yellow.
Weigela
Weigela. Shrubs.
Weigelas are opposite-leaved, deciduous 
shrubs grown for their bright flowers, which 
appear in late spring and early summer. Because 
they lack interesting fruit and autumn color, 
weigelas are best used in the mixed shrub 
border.
Set out in spring or fall in full sun or light 
shade (the further south, the more shade). 
They prefer a well-drained soil, but one that 
does not dry out: a summer mulch is beneficial.
Weigelas are remarkably free of serious 
problems. Powdery mildew will coat the leaves 
with its typical white powder, more unsightly 
than threatening; see "Leaves with powdery' 
white coating" on page 237 for controls.
Wisteria
Wisteria. Vines.
Wisterias are vigorous vines with alternate, 
compound leaves. They climb, often to amaz­
ing heights: because of their ultimate size, 
they require strong supports. Their long flower 
clusters, often fragrant, appear in late spring, 
and a plant in full bloom is a delightful sight in 
the landscape.
Wisterias are among the finest and most 
impressive of ornamental vines. They grow 
best in full sun but will tolerate some shade. 
Set out in spring or fall in deeply prepared, 
moisture-retentive soil. Wisterias are often reluc­
tant to bloom, sometimes taking many years. 
They seem to grow and flower best when given 
ample water: reluctant plants can sometimes
Copyrighted material

252 
■ 
PROBLEM-SOLVING PLANT GUIDE
be induced to bloom by severe root pruning, 
combined with pruning off some of the most 
vigorous shoots.
In warmer areas, where wisterias grow 
with amazing vigor, they are sometimes allowed 
to climb up on dead trees; be sure not to train 
them on a live one—it will quickly be strangled.
Problems
Leaves skeletonized or with large holes; 
branches may be webbed. Cause: Caterpillars.
For control measures, see "Leaves skeleton­
ized or with large holes; branches may be 
webbed" on page 236.
Leaves with notched edges. Cause: Black 
vine weevils. The wingless, '/j", brownish black 
adults feed on the foliage; spray leaves several 
times with pyrethrin for major infestations. 
The small, C-shaped, white grubs of these 
weevils feed on the roots and weaken the plant; 
drench the soil around the base of the plant 
with a solution of parasitic nematodes.
Yucca
Yucca, Adam’s-needle. Perennials.
Clumps of stiff, sword-shaped, light green 
leaves arising from the ground give yuccas a 
strong presence in any landscape. Native in 
the southwestern United States and Mexico, 
where many species assume treelike form and 
heights up to 30', only a few yuccas are hardy 
north of Zone 7. A dam ’s-needle ( Yucca 
filamentosa) is a popular 3' plant, hardy to 
Zone 4, with evergreen, l'A" wide leaves and 
tall spikes of midsummer white flowers. Var­
iegated cultivars are available.
Succulent yuccas grow well in conditions 
resembling the semi-desert of the Southwest: 
full sun and well-drained, sandy soil. Excess 
moisture, especially in the winter, encourages 
rots. New plants form at the base of mature 
yuccas and can be easily divided.
Insect pests such as yucca plant bugs and 
scales are more prevalent and likely to cause 
damage where yuccas are native. Aphids may 
infest Adam’s-needle; see "Leaves, stems, and 
buds distorted, sticky; clusters of small insects” 
on page 177 for controls. Fungal leaf spots 
may appear and are best controlled with cul­
tural practices: Limit excess water on foliage 
and remove severely infected plant parts.
Copyrighted materi

ZINNIA ■ 
253
Zinnia
Zinnia. Annuals.
You could fill an entire garden with zin­
nias and have a different type in every section. 
Plant height ranges from 6" to 36"; flowers 
can he button-size to dinner plate-size, single 
or double, smooth or ruffled, solid, multi­
colored, or striped. Just about every color is 
represented except blue. Flowering is possi­
ble from spring until frost.
Zinnias are easy to raise from seed and 
can bloom within 2 months. Successive sow­
ings are recom m ended to give continuous 
flowering. Indoors, sow seeds in individual 
pots 8 weeks before last frost. Move seedlings 
outdoors very carefully when soil is consis­
tently warm. Direct-sowing is preferred, as 
zinnias resent root disturbance; in fact, some 
double-flowered cultivars may revert to single 
on transplanting. Direct-sow in spring and early 
summer when night temperatures stay over 
50°F Cover lightly and press soil down firmly. 
Germination takes 6 days. When seedlings 
are 3" tall, thin to allow 4'-12" between plants, 
depending on final size.
If you purchase seedling or potted zinnias, 
look for those that have not begun flowering 
or setting buds. Expect slow growth initially 
after transplanting. Make certain roots don't 
dry out in the process, water immediately, and 
give temporary shade in hot weather while 
plants adjust.
Zinnias need sun, ample water, good 
drainage, fertile soil, regular fertilizer, and good 
air circulation. They grow poorly in cool 
weather. Pinch initial buds to encourage side 
growth and flower formation. Remove spent 
flowers to prolong the blooming period. Water 
only from below; overhead watering weights 
down the already heavy flowers, causing stems 
to snap. Overhead watering also burns foliage
and encourages mildew. Use a complete fertil­
izer once a month.
Problems
L eaves w ith pow dery w h ite p a tch es.
Cause: Powdery mildew. Zinnias are extremely 
prone to mildew if not given excellent air 
circulation. For more information on control­
ling powdery mildew, see "Leaves with pow­
dery white patches*’ on page 19.
Plant wilts; leaves ragged. Cause: Stalk 
borers. Borers are long, thin, striped caterpil­
lars that may have purple stripes. These lar­
vae feed on leaves and within the wide zinnia 
stems. A small hole in the stalk marks their 
initial entrance. Stalk feeding can kill the plant.
Cut affected stems below the borer’s hole: 
some plants may develop sideshoots that later 
flower. To save prize zinnias, try slitting affected 
stems and removing the borer, then binding 
stems together with green twine and keeping 
plants particularly well watered. Or inject 
BTK or parasitic nematodes into the stem 
with a syringe. A foliar application of BTK 
may be effective if borers feed on the leaves. 
Keep the garden weed-free to eliminate over­
wintering sites.
Leaves stippled with yellow; foliage webbed. 
Cause: Spider mites. For controls, see "Leaves 
stippled with yellow; foliage webbed” on 
page 18.
Seedlings or young plants cut off at soil 
level. Cause: Cutworms. See "Seedlings or 
young plants cut off at soil level’’ on page 20 
for controls.
Blossom s and foliage disappear. Cause: 
Blister beetles. These metallic, dark-colored. 
3/ / ' beetles have long antennae and long legs. 
They begin chewing on flowers and leaves in 
June. Blister beetles have body fluids that may 
cause painful blisters on skin contact. Handle 
only with gloves. Control serious infestations 
with pyrethrin.
Seedlings die. Cause: Damping-off. See 
"Seedlings die” on page 20 for controls.

Recognizing Your Friends— 
Eliminating Your Foes
INSECTS
PART

I nsects predate gardeners by eons. During the Paleo­
zoic era 400 million years ago, huge cockroaches and 
dragonflies with 2-foot wingspans traveled the earth. 
Their diversity and range of adaptations to every 
climate and habitat have made insects the most varied, 
widespread group of all animals.
• 
'-“V,
m
m
1
' V
------------------— ------ ------- ----------. mmmw-

T h e  pest insects that eat our treasured orna­
mentals and rob a share of the vegetable har­
vest are only a tiny fraction of the total insect 
population around us. The overwhelming major­
ity of insects are harmless members of the 
natural community. Many are directly benefi­
cial in their role as crop pollinators, predators 
on pests, and decomposers of plant material. 
They can be as common as houseflies, distri­
buted globally, or as rare as the flea that lives 
on the skin of certain sea mammals or the 
midge that lives in the tiny pool of water in a 
pitcher plant.
It's important to keep this broader pic­
ture of the good side of insects in mind when 
fighting garden pests. Some control methods, 
especially organic sprays and dusts, kill bene­
ficials as effectively as they kill pests. The goal 
for the organic gardener is to work with nature 
as much as possible to let populations of pests 
and beneficials balance one another.
What Are Insects?
Insects are animals in the class Insecta, 
which is part of the larger group of animals 
known as arthropods, meaning creatures with 
jointed legs. They are cold-blooded and wear 
their skeletons on the outside like armor.
Spiders, millipedes, mites, crabs, and lob­
sters are also arthropods. Insects differ from 
these creatures because they have wings and 
only six legs. Their bodies are divided into 
three sections: the head: the thorax or mid­
section. where legs and wings are attached if 
they have them: and the abdomen or tail sec­
tion, where the digestive and reproductive
organs are located. On their heads, insects 
have a pair of antennae or "feelers." which are 
complex sensory organs. Insects also have at 
least one pair of eyes and often extra rudimen­
tary eyes (called ocelli) as well. They breathe 
through a system of small, round openings, or 
spiracles, along the sides of their bodies. These 
open into small, branching tubes, known as 
trachea, that carry oxygen through their tissues.
Insect anatomy. While insects come in an 
amazing assortment of shapes and sizes, they 
all share the same basic body structure.
256
Copyrighted material

WHAT ARE INSECTS? ■ 
257
Insect Life Cycles
Although there are insects with weird 
quirks in their life cycles that seem like some­
thing out of science fiction, the development 
of most insects follows one of two basic pat­
terns of metamorphosis, or change of form.
Complete M etamorphosis
This pattern has an immobile stage, called 
a pupa, between the immature and adult forms 
of the insect. During the pupal stage, the tis­
sues of the immature insect transform into an 
adult with an entirely different appearance. 
Butterflies, moths, wasps, beetles, and flies 
exhibit this type of metamorphosis.
The cycle begins with an egg, which 
hatches into a tiny, immature insect called a 
larva. All young insects are larvae, but we 
often use the terms caterpillar for moth or 
butterfly larvae, grub for beetle or wasp larvae, 
and maggot for fly larvae. As a larva grows, it 
periodically molts its skin to accommodate its 
enlarging body (one of the complications of 
having a skeleton on the outside).
When the larva reaches maximum size, 
usually after a number of molts, it contracts 
into a shorter, legless pupa. The pupa has a 
hardened skin to protect the developing adult 
inside. Some larvae spin a silken outer cocoon 
or chrysalis before pupating, for protection 
during the resting state. When the adult is 
ready to emerge, it splits open the pupal case 
and crawls out, still damp and soft. It slowly 
expands its wings. After its outer skeleton 
darkens and hardens, it is ready to fly away.
Larvae that undergo complete metamor­
phosis usually eat different food and live in 
different habitats than the adults of the species. 
This is important to remember if you want to 
attract beneficial insects. Generally, the adult 
form of beneficial species is the winged form 
that can migrate to your garden. These adults 
feed on pollen and nectar flowers. Be sure to 
provide a food source for them in order to
reap the benefits of having their predatory 
offspring growing among your plants.
Incom plete M etamorphosis
Insects that develop gradually from imma­
ture stages to adults without pupating follow a 
pattern of incomplete metamorphosis. True 
bugs, including pests such as tarnished plant 
bugs and boxelder bugs as well as praying 
mantids, aphids, and whiteflies, exhibit incom­
plete metamorphosis.
The cycle starts with an egg, which hatches 
into a larva, usually called a nymph, that looks 
like a miniature, wingless version of the adult 
insect. The resemblance of nymphs to adults 
increases with each molt. They grow larger, 
their bodies lengthen, and small wing buds 
appear. With the final molt, they become adults 
with fully formed wings and reproductive 
organs. Adults and nymphs of species with 
this pattern usually eat the same kind of food.
Feeding Habits
Insects eat an incredible variety of foods: 
leaves, roots, plant sap, wood, other insects, 
other arthropods, blood of birds and mammals, 
decaying plant material, pollen, nectar, dung, 
particles of algae, and even fungi. Some, like 
cockroaches, can digest nearly anything they 
can get their mandibles (jaws) on, while oth­
ers must find a particular species of plant to 
eat or they will die. The disappearance of 
many butterfly species is due to the loss of 
their particular host plants as wild areas are 
cultivated or paved.
Plant-eaters: Plant-eating insects usually 
are no friend to gardeners. They are adapted 
to chewing, sucking, or boring in leaves, stems, 
or roots. However, some species that eat weeds 
are beneficial. These insects usually must con­
sume a large volume of plant material relative 
to their size to obtain enough nutrients to 
continue their development and reproduction.

258 ■ 
INSECTS
Carnivores: Most of us are familiar with 
carnivorous insects such as mosquitoes, deer 
flies, and biting midges. These pests land on 
mammals or birds, suck blood for a short 
period of time, and then fly away. Others that 
feed on blood, such as lice and fleas, live on 
the skin of animals, hidden in their fur. Gar­
deners should also get to know the large group 
of carnivorous insects that feed on insects or 
other arthropods. These are divided into two 
main groups—predators and parasites.
Predatory insects such as lady beetles or 
ground beetles eat many other insects during 
their life cycles. Some have restricted tastes; 
for example, aphid midges feed only on aphids. 
Others, like praying mantids or assassin bugs, 
may be able to eat almost any species of insect 
they catch. These general predators often eat 
pollen as well and may suck plant juices when 
food is scarce or they need water.
Insects that parasitize other insects are 
called parasitoids. They lay eggs singly or in 
groups near, on, or inside the bodies of other 
insects. The parasitoid larvae develop as inter­
nal parasites. Parasitoids eventually kill the 
host, then pupate inside or crawl outside and 
pupate near the dead husk.
Scavengers: Dung beetles, carrion bee­
tles, housefly larvae, and other insect species 
feed on decaying plant or animal material. 
These creatures perform a valuable task by 
breaking down these materials and hastening 
decomposition.
Omnivores: The ultimate survival strat­
egy is to be able to eat nearly anything—a 
strategy favored by cockroaches, earwigs, and 
other pests. These species feed on all kinds of 
animal and vegetable materials, including soap, 
starch, and glue.
Fungus-feeders: Fungus gnat larvae, many 
kinds of soil-dwelling insects and mites, and 
a few species of lady beetle larvae actually 
eat fungi.
Beneficial Insects
As gardeners, we are most likely to notice 
the pest insects in our yards and gardens. 
However, entomologists estimate that more 
than 90 percent of all insects are beneficial. 
Wild and domestic bees and also some flies 
and moths pollinate crops; this is essential for 
the development of many fruits, vegetables, 
and crops grown for seed. Honeybees are also 
farmed to provide honey, and silkworms are 
farmed to yield silk from their cocoons for 
fine clothing.
Many species are decomposers: They recy­
cle nutrients from organic materials and dung, 
and clean up the environment in the bargain. 
There are tremendous numbers of insects that 
have little direct effect on humans, but are 
essential food for fish, birds, and other animals.
Of most immediate interest to gardeners, 
however, are the thousands of species of pred­
atory insects that attack pests. They are com­
mon worldwide and most numerous in gardens 
where pesticides are not used. Although they 
are often unseen, we reap immeasurable ben­
efit from their presence. Sometimes the bene­
ficials are difficult to distinguish from the pests. 
See ‘insect Impostors" on page 260 for hints 
to help you see the difference between these 
two groups of insects.
Attracting and Conserving
The first and most important rule for the 
gardener who wants to encourage beneficial 
insects is to avoid using toxic sprays or dusts in 
the garden. Even botanical pesticides and insec­
ticidal soap sprays kill beneficial insects as 
well as they kill pests. Use them only when 
absolutely necessary and only apply them on 
the plants being attacked.
To lure native beneficial insects into your 
garden, provide them with an attractive food 
supply. Since the adults of many beneficial

CONTROLLING INSECT PESTS ■ 
259
insects feed only on pollen and nectar, the 
best way to attract them is to plant small- 
flowered plants, such as dill, fennel, parsley, 
and mint family plants. Members of the mus­
tard family, including garden vegetables such 
as radishes or broccoli that have gone to flower, 
are also good choices. There are many small- 
flowered annual, biennial, and perennial flow­
ers to suit any garden. You can interplant 
them among the vegetables as well as in bor­
ders and beds.
Once adults of beneficial species have 
arrived in your garden and have had a meal, 
the females will search for a good place to lay 
eggs, which later hatch into predatory larvae. 
Beneficial ground-dwelling insects, such as 
rove and ground beetles, find refuges in per­
manent walkways of sod, stone, or thick 
mulches. This provides them with a safe place 
to hide when plantings are being disturbed, 
cultivated, or harvested.
It is important to minimize dust and pro­
vide a water source in hot, dry areas to protect 
beneficial insects. They are easily killed by 
dehydration. Hedges, windbreaks, and even 
fences help keep down dust. An old birdbath 
filled with water and rocks or gravel (to pro­
vide safe landing places for tiny insects so they 
won t drown) will be used by many beneficial 
species. Hedgerows and permanent beds pro­
tect beneficial insects while there are disrup­
tions in the garden and often provide them 
with an alternate food supply of nonpest insects 
living in the hedge.
Controlling Insect Pests
Pest problems concern every gardener. 
However, it's possible to have good harvests 
and beautiful gardens without exterminating 
every pest insect that enters your yard. The 
goal to strive for is to suppress pest popula­
tions to the point at which they don't interfere 
with our harvest or our enjoyment of orna­
mental gardens. Leaving a few pests in the 
garden attracts and sustains beneficial insects.
The concept of keeping pest populations 
at acceptable levels is an important part of 
organic pest management, a system of pest 
control that uses a variety of methods to reduce 
pest populations without resorting to synthetic 
chemicals. It is based on improving the health 
of the garden ecosystem—from maintaining 
fertile soils with high organic matter content 
to encouraging a complex, diverse plant com­
munity attractive to many species of insects 
and birds. Managing pests organically includes 
a range of strategies.
Cultural controls: These are steps the 
gardener takes while planting or cultivating 
crops to make the garden less hospitable to 
pests. It includes growing healthy plants on 
fertile soil to make them less attractive to 
insects (or able to recover faster), using pest- 
resistant cultivars, applying mulches to foil 
pests, and using sanitation methods such as 
removing garden trash or roots that harbor 
the overwintering stages of pests.
Physical controls: Using barriers, such 
as floating row cover, cutworm collars, or tree 
bands physically prevents insects from reach­
ing plants. Cultivating soil in fall to kill over­
wintering pests, handpicking large pests, or 
knocking heavy insects such as Japanese bee­
tles or plum curculios from foliage are also 
physical controls.
Biological controls: Using living organ­
isms to control pests is called biological control. 
These controls include disease organisms such 
as Bacillus (huringiensis that infect insects as 
well as predatory or parasitic insects or mites. 
Many beneficial insects have been introduced 
from other countries to control imported pests 
and thousands of beneficial species are native 
to North America. Several dozen species are
1continued on page 262)

260 ■ 
INSECTS
Insect Impostors
H
old your horses! Before you squash that bug or turn on that 
sprayer, take a close look. There are several species of common 
beneficial insects that are look-alikes of equally common pest species. 
Here are some that might stump you. (Hint: The good guys are always 
on the left.)
A phid midge 
Fungus gnat
While aphid midges resemble fungus gnats, they 
are actually excellent predators of more than 60 
species of aphids.
Before you stomp on that earwig, make sure it's 
not a rove beetle, which preys on many common 
garden pests.
Earwig
Rove beetle
Lady beetle
Mexican bean beetle
Spined soldier bug
Brown stink
A lady beetle should be one of your best friends 
in the garden. But its cousin, the Mexican bean beetle, 
can be one of your worst enemies.
Many kinds of stink bugs are pests, but spined 
soldier bugs are voracious predators of a variety of 
caterpillars and grubs.
il

CONTROLLING INSECT PESTS 
■ 
261
Mealybug destroyer larva 
Mealybugs
Bigeyed bug 
Chinch bug
It's easy to confuse mealybugs with the benefi­
cial creatures that eat them-mealybug destroyer 
larvae.
They may look like pesky houseflies, but don't 
use the swatter! Tachmid flies lay eggs on many types 
of caterpillar pests, and the tachinid larvae feed on 
and kill tne caterpillars.
Look for the big eyes! Bigeyed bugs are your 
friends, unlike chinch bugs, which munch on the roots 
of your lawn or corn crop.
Hover fly 
Baldfaced hornet
If it's a baldfaced hornet, you may fear its sting. 
But the only creatures that should be afraid of a hover 
fly are the aphids in your garden
lachinid fly
Housefly
Copyrighted material

262 
■ 
INSECTS
Coordinated Control
C
ombining different control methods thot 
are effective against individual stages in 
a pest's life cycle can boost your success in 
keeping the pest from damaging plants. The 
codling moth, a serious pest of apples and 
other fruit trees, is a good example of a pest 
that is vulnerable to several types of controls.
In late winter, while trees are dormant, 
kill larvae overwintering in cocoons in the 
bark by scraping away loose bark and apply­
ing dormant oil sprays. Larvae overwintering 
in the soil litter are susceptible to attack by 
ground beetles, especially in orchards with 
cover crops, which protect the beetle popu­
lations.
In the spring, you can determine when 
adults begin to emerge from pupae by hang­
ing pheromone traps among the trees to cap­
ture male moths. Pheromone lures nung in 
trees at this time will disrupt mating by con­
fusing the males in their search for females. 
Once adults begin appearing in the traps, re­
lease parasitic Trichogromma w asps at 7-10 
day intervals to attack the eggs that the 
adults will lay
Most likely, some moths will still suc­
cessfully mate and lay eggs, and some of 
those eggs will escape the parasites. For­
tunately, you can control the larvae that do 
hatch before they enter the apples by spray­
ing pyrethrin or codling moth granulosis virus 
at 7-10 day intervals.
Once larvae have tunneled into fruit, they 
are relatively safe from control measures. 
However, after feeding, they will crawl down 
the trees to find a place to spin a cocoon. 
Intercept the migration by tying burlap tree 
bands around the trees. Check them daily 
and destroy the larvae.
You'll repeat the same control cycle for 
the second generation, and for a third gener­
ation in warmer areas. If you're diligent, you 
should have negligible damage from codling 
moths.
now sold by insectaries for release in gardens, 
orchards, and greenhouses.
Organic sprays and dusts: There are sev­
eral natural sprays, dusts, or baits that repel or 
poison pests. You can make some types your­
self from garden and kitchen ingredients. You 
can buy products including botanical pesti­
cides such as neem or pyrethrin.
For some pests, using a single control 
method may be sufficient to prevent damage. 
Cutworm collars are reliable barriers against 
cutworms: once the spring risk to transplants 
has passed no further action need be taken.
For other pests, especially if they are
numerous or very damaging, you'll need to 
combine several controls at one time or in 
succession throughout the season. See “Coor­
dinated Control” above to find out how using 
several different control methods at various 
points throughout the life cycle of the codling 
moth gives more successful control.
Remember that some controls are not 
compatible with one another. For example, 
spraying botanical pesticides can harm bene­
ficial insects, so don't spray when you have 
just released beneficial insects, and don't apply 
pesticides on plants that are attractive to ben­
eficial insects.

CONTROLLING INSECT PESTS ■ 
263
and/or 
* 
^ isfu p lio n  I
G ro u n d  beetles attack
Late winter
Scrape bark; 
spray with dormant oil
Spring
Pyrethrin of granulosis sprays
t I \ J I
T r k h o i j r a m m a  releases 
1 
\  
\
Summer
Pyrethnn or granulosis sprays
1 ! I! I
Trichogramma releases
I 
J I
Pherom one traps
Pherom one traps and/or 
disruption lures
Moths 
•
•. .v* 
..
Larvae caught 
P“ P®<
in tree bands 
2
G round beetles attack
Larvae caught / / 
i • 
in trc cb a n d s/ v  
J
G round beetles 
attack
Timing insect-eontrol methods. White arrows follow the life cycle of 
the codling moth from the pupation of overwintering larvae in spring 
through 2 full generations to the end of summer. Black arrows 
indicate when to use various control methods to coincide with the 
vulnerable phase in the insect's life cycle.
Planning Your Strategy
The first step in controlling a pest is iden­
tifying it. If you don’t have any idea what pest 
has caused the damage you’ve found, start by 
referring to “Common Insect Damage Symp­
toms** on page 264. The listings of symptoms 
and possible culprits should help you deter­
mine what pest is causing the problem.
Some destructive insects look similar to 
beneficial species, so be sure your identifica­
tion is accurate. You can check “Insect Impos­
tors" on page 260 for a quick rundown on 
common beneficials that resemble pests.
If you aren't sure you've figured out the
identity of your pest, get expert help from 
your local extension service, garden center, 
or university entomology department.
Remember that some damage symptoms 
can have many causes. The problem you see 
may be because of a disease organism or cul­
tural problem. Or the damage may have been 
from insects that are no longer feeding. Once 
you’ve made a positive identification, look up 
the pest in the individual insect entries that 
follow. Plan a control strategy based on the 
suggested controls in these entries. For details 
on using a particular control method, see 
“Organic Controls" beginning on page 404.

Common Insect Damage Symptoms
I
f you have damaged plants and aren't sure what 
insect is causing the injury, use this table to 
narrow the list of possible culprits. Look for the 
description of damage symptoms in the left-hand 
column that matches your plant's symptoms. Next, 
find the appropriate category of host plants that
suffer from those symptoms. Then look up the 
insects listed in the individual insect entries. The 
photographs and information in the entries will 
help you identify the pest and take appropriate 
steps to control it.
Symptoms
Host Plants
Insects
LEAF AND FOLIAGE DAMAGE
Small plants cut off at soil line
Vegetables, flowers
Cutworms, slugs and snails
Large holes chewed in leaves;
Beans
Mexican bean beetles
no excrement visible
Cucumbers, corn, peanuts 
Flowers, vegetables 
Potatoes
Spotted cucumber beetles 
Japanese beetles, slugs and snails 
Colorado potato beetles
Large holes chewed in leaves, 
dark green excrement often 
visible
Cabbage family plants 
Tomatoes
Vegetables, fruits, ornamentals
Cabbage loopers. imported 
cabbageworms, diamondback 
moths
Tomato hornworms, tomato 
fruitworms
Wbollybear caterpillars
Small, round holes in leaves
Cabbage family plants, potatoes, 
spinach, flowers
Flea beetles
Puckered, twisted leaves; sticky 
honeydew present
Vegetables, fruits, ornamentals
Aphids
Puckered, twisted leaves; no sticky 
honeydew
Vegetables, fruits, ornamentals
Thrips, leafhoppers, plant bugs, 
buffalo treehoppers, spittlebugs/ 
froghoppers, nematodes
Partially or fully defoliated plants
Asparagus
Conifers
Deciduous trees and shrubs 
Flowers, vegetables
Pears, cherries, plums, 
cotoneasters
Squash family plants
Asparagus beetles
Conifer sawflies, gypsy moths, 
spruce budworms
Gypsy moths, June/May beetles, 
cankerworms, tussock moths
Armyworms, blister beetles, 
climbing cutworms, rose chafers, 
striped cucumber beetles
Pear sawflies
Striped cucumber beetles
264
Copyrighted m

Symptoms
Host Plants
Insects
Chewed vines and leaves
Potatoes
Potato tuberworms
Squash family plants
Pickleworms, squash vine borers
Shoot or branch tips wilt and die
Fruit and shade trees
Oriental fruit moths
Squash family plants
Squash bugs
Vegetables, fruits, flowers
Tarnished plant bugs and other 
plant bugs
Webbing on leaves, stems, and 
branch rips
Apples, roses, other deciduous 
trees and shrubs
Obliquebanded leafrollers, fruittree 
leafrollers, tent caterpillars, fall 
webworms
Vegetables, strawberries
Garden webworms
Small baglike cocoons with bits of 
leaves attached hanging from 
branches
Fruit trees, ornamental trees and 
shrubs
Bagworms
Mines between upper and lower 
leaf surfoces
Apples, roses, other deciduous 
trees and shrubs
Obliquebanded leafrollers (young 
larvae)
Beets, chard, nightshade family 
plants
Leafminers
Cabbage family plants
Diamondback moths (young larvae)
Chrysanthemums and other 
ornamentals
Leafminers
Elms, birches, alders
Leafminer sawflies
Yellow leaves
Citrus and other fruit trees
Soft scales, armored scales
Lawn grasses
Chinch bugs
Pears, quinces
Pear psyllas
Yellow and withered leaves
Evergreen trees and shrubs, 
strawberries, bramble fruits
Black vine weevil larvae
Russeted leaves
Apples, pears, tomatoes, 
ornamentals
Rust mites
Small, discolored spots on leaves
Vegetables, flowers
Garden fleahoppers
White, gray, or silvery speckled 
pattern on leaves
Vegetables, ornamentals, fruit 
and shade trees
Spider mites, thrips, loce bugs
Sticky honeydew on leaves
Pears, quinces
Pear psyllas
Vegetables, fruits, ornamentals
Aphids, scales, mealybugs, 
whiteflies
(continued)
Copyrighted material

266 
■ 
INSECTS
Common Insect Damage Symptoms — Continued
Symptoms 
Host Plants 
Insects
LEAF AND FOLIAGE DAMAGE — CONTINUED 
.*■ ' 
*
-J 
’J * * 
•
Galls on leaves
Oaks, roses
Gall wasps
Maples
Gall mites
FRUIT DAMAGE
ifv  It?. '-Xi■* 
■’r  ’ - 4 
*•
Early-dropping fruit
Apples, plums, blueberries
Apple maggots, plum curculios
Citrus and other tree fruits, grapes
Mealybugs
Tree fruits, blueberries, currants
Fruit flies
Damage around pit in fruit
Almonds, walnuts
Navel orangeworms
Cherries
Codling moths
Tunnels to core of fruit
Apples and other tree fruits
Codling moths. Oriental fruit moths, 
plum cucurtios
Citrus, figs
Navel orangeworms
Large holes or damaged areas in 
fruit or ears
Com
Com earworms, European com 
borers
Squash family plants
Pickleworms
Tomatoes
Tomato hornworms, tomato 
fruitworms
Distorted, scarred fruit
Vegetables, fruits
Tarnished plant bugs and other 
plant bugs, stink bugs, thrips
Russeted appearance of fruit
Apples, pears
Rust mites
Holes bored in seeds and pods
Beans
Bean weevils
Copyrighted material

I
CONTROLLING INSECT PESTS ■ 
267
Symptoms
Host Plants
Insects
\ STEM AND TRUNK DAMAGE 
, \  
.
Holes bored in trunk
Apple and other fruit trees, 
mountain ashes, hawthorns
Roundheaded appletree borers, 
peachtree borers
Holes bored in stems, buds, or 
shoots
Corn
European corn borers, south­
western corn borers
Currants, gooseberries, 
raspberries, rhododendrons
Fruit borers
Galleries bored under bark
Elms
Elm bark beetles
Fruit and shade trees
Flatheaded appletree borers, 
shothole borers
ROOT DAMAGE
Holes tunneled in roots
Cabbage family plants
Cabbage maggots
Carrot family
Carrot rust flies, corrot beetles, 
carrot weevils
Gladiolus and other flower corms
Wireworms
Irises
Iris borers
Onions, leeks, garlic
Onion maggots
Potatoes
Potato tuberworms, wireworms
Strawberries, grapes, raspberries, 
other fruits
Strawberry root weevils
Knotted, lumpy roots
Beans, peas, other legumes
Beneficial bacteria in roots
Tomatoes, lettuce, peppers, 
nonlegumes
Nematodes
Chewed, stunted, withered, or 
Lawn grasses 
Japanese beetles, June/May beetles,
damaged roots 
rose chafers, chinch bugs
Copyrighted material

INSECT 
IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
M
 any of the pests that damage garden plants 
are widespread in the United States and Canada. 
Some are very damaging only in a particular 
region of North America. This guide prov ides 
information on the appearance, range, host 
plants, damage, life cycle, and control of more 
than 100 types of common garden pests. It 
includes some pests that are technically not 
insects, such as mites and slugs, but that cause 
similar types of damage and are v ulnerable to
many of the same control methods as insects.
The guide also offers information on the 
appearance, range, life cycle, and helpful effects 
of more than 20 beneficial types of insects, 
along with suggestions on how to attract them 
to your gardens. Note that beneficial insect 
names appear in green type; the names of the 
pest insects appear in black. So, you can tell 
at a glance which are the bad bugs and which 
are beneficial.
Aphid Midge Aphidoletes afihidimyza
Larva
Adult
Description: Adults: delicate, long-legged, 
'/ift" flies, active at night. Larvae: orange 
maggots, up to 
Eggs: minute orange 
ovals. Common throughout North America; 
sold commercially.
Beneficial Effect: Larvae paralyze aphids 
with toxic saliva, then suck their body fluids. 
Can attack more than 60 aphid species.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs among
Aphid mummies
aphids, eggs hatch in 2-3 days; larvae feed on 
aphids 3-5 days, then burrow into soil to 
pupate; adults emerge in 2 weeks. Overwin­
ters as larvae in the soil.
How to Attract: Plant pollen and nectar 
plants; protect garden from winds; provide a 
water source; buy 200-300 cocoons for a 
small garden or greenhouse or use 3-5 
cocoons per plant, 5-10 per fruit tree.
268
Copyrighted m

APHIDS ■ 
269
Anhicis ( Family Aphididac)
Cabbage aphids
Green peach aphids
Melon aphid winged adult 
Damage
Description: Adulis: pear-shaped, '/w 
insects with 2 short tubes projecting back­
ward from the abdomen: long antennae; 
green, pink, black, dusty gray, or with white 
fluffy coating; with or without wings. Nymphs: 
similar to adults. Colonies develop quickly; 
winged forms appear when they become 
crowded. Common throughout North America.
Damage: Nymphs and adults suck plant 
sap from most small fruits, vegetables, 
ornamentals, and fruit and shade trees. Their 
feeding causes leaf, bud, and flower distor­
tions: severely infested leaves and flowers 
drop. Fruit that forms on infested branches 
are misshapen and stunted. Aphids secrete 
sticky honeydew that supports growth of 
sooty mold on leaves and fruit. Feeding can 
spread viral diseases.
Life Cycle: Eggs overwinter on woody 
stems, hatching in spring into stem females, 
which can give birth continuously to live 
nymphs without having to mate. Nymphs
Woolly apple aphids
mature in 1-2 weeks. In fall, males and 
normal females are born; these mate to 
produce overwintering eggs. In greenhouses, 
some females continue to bear nymphs 
throughout the year. Some species feed on 
cereal crops or weeds for part of the year and 
on fruit trees at other times.
Control: For vegetable crops and small 
ornamentals, spray smaller plants frequently 
with a strong stream of water to knock 
aphids off: attract native predators and 
parasites by planting pollen and nectar 
plants: release purchased aphid midges, lady 
beetles, lacewings. or parasitic wasps; use 
homemade garlic, quassia, or tomato-leaf 
sprays; spray insecticidal soap; as a last 
resort, spray infested plants with neem or 
pyrethrin. For fruit or shade trees, spray 
dormant oil to kill overwintering eggs, and 
plant flowering groundcovers in home orchards 
to attract predators and parasites.

270 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION (il IDE
Apple Maggot R fx ig u le tis  p o m o n e lla
r
Adult 
Damage
Description: Adults: ‘//'flies with yel­
low legs and transparent wings patterned 
with dark, crosswise bands. Larvae: white. 
lA" maggots. Found in eastern United States 
and Canada, also northern California.
Damage: Maggots tunnel through apples, 
blueberries, and plums. Fruit drops prema­
turely: early cultivars are most affected.
Life Cycle: Adults emerge from over­
wintering pupae mid-June to July and lay 
eggs in punctures in fruit skin; eggs hatch in
5-7 days, larvae tunnel in fruit until it drops, 
then leave to pupate in soil for winter. One 
generation per year. Some pupae remain 
dormant for several years.
Control: Collect and destroy dropped 
fruit daily until September, twice a month in 
fall; hang apple maggot traps in trees from 
mid-June until harvest (1 per dwarf tree, 6 
per full-size tree); plant clover groundcover 
to attract beetles that prey on pupae; grow 
late-maturing cultivars.
Armyworms (Family N octuidae)
Beet armx worm
Description: Adults: pale, gray-brown 
moths with a white dot in center of forewing 
(1 
wingspan), active only at night. 
Larvae: early stages smooth, pale green;
older larvae reach VA": greenish brown with 
white stripes on sides, dark or light stripes 
along backs. Eggs: greenish white, in masses 
on lower leaves. Found east of the Rockies
Beet army worm
Fall army worm
T iaterlal

ASPARAGUS BEETLE 
■ 
271
and in southeastern Canada, also in New 
Mexico, Arizona, and California. Beet army- 
worm is common in southern United States.
Damage: Larvae feed on com , field 
crops, and garden plants at night, hiding 
during the day in the center of corn plants or 
under stones or leaf litter. When food supply 
is depleted, they move en masse to a new 
location Larvae can consume whole plants 
in 1 night. First generation larvae (June) usu­
ally cause the most damage.
Life Cycle: Larvae (sometimes pupae) 
overwinter in soil or litter around roots, 
resume feeding in spring, then pupate for 2 
weeks. Two to 3 generations per year.
Control: Attract native parasitic wasps 
and flies; spray BTK to kill larvae; spray 
superior oil in July to kill eggs of second 
generation.
Asparagus Beetle Crioceris aspam gi
also attack older stems and leaves.
Life Cycle: Hibernating adults emerge 
when first asparagus spears are ready to cut; 
they feed and lay eggs on spears. Eggs hatch 
in 1 week, larvae feed for 2 weeks, then 
burrow into the soil to pupate. Adults emerge 
in 10 days. Two or 3 generations per year.
Control: In fall, remove and bum old 
fronds and garden trash where beetles 
overwinter, or put it in sealed containers for 
disposal with household trash; in spring, 
cover spears with floating row cover until 
end of harvest; handpick beetles; as a last 
resort, spray pyrethrin.
Larva 
Adult
Description: Adults: shiny, elongate, 
bluish b la c k .b e e tle s  with reddish brown 
thoraxes. 4 cream-colored spots and red 
borders on wing covers. Larvae: 
plump,
wrinkled, and gray with dark heads and legs. 
Eggs: shiny, black, glued on end to stems and 
young spears. Common throughout North 
America. The spotted asparagus beetle 
(Crioceris duodecimpunctata) causes similar 
damage, but is generally found east of the Mis­
sissippi River. Beetles are red-orange with 12 
black spots on wing covers; larvae are orange.
Damage: Adults and larvae chew on 
green asparagus shoots, blemishing spears;
Copyrighted material

272 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
Assassin Bugs ( Family R eduviidae)
Adult and prey 
Adult and prey
Description: Adults: flattened, JAW bugs 
with long, narrow heads and stout, curving 
beaks, some with flared or sculptured tho­
raxes: may bite when handled: some species 
squeak. Nymphs: smaller, similar to adults, 
wingless, some brightly colored, others dis­
guised by coating of dust or debris. Found 
throughout North America.
Beneficial Effect: General predators that
help suppress populations of many insects, 
including flies and caterpillars.
Life Cycle: Adults lay eggs in crevices: 
nymphs develop until last molt and hibernate 
in a pre-adult stage, then develop to adults 
the following June.
How to Attract: Naturally present in 
most gardens. Avoid pesticide use.
Bagworm Thyriclopteryx ef)hem em eform is
Larvae in bags 
Larva in bag
Description: Adults: males are black, 
clear-winged moths (1" wingspan); females 
are wingless. Larvae: dark brown, V«"-l" 
caterpillars with white or yellow heads; feed 
inside cocoons. Eggs: light tan eggs laid 
inside bags. Found east of Rocky Mountains.
Damage: Larvae eat foliage of many 
trees and shrubs. Bags mar plant appearance. 
Use a knife to cut the silk from the twig; if 
you tear the bag away, you’ll leave a coil of 
tightly wound silk ready to girdle the twig.
Life Cycle: Eggs hatch inside bags in 
spring. Larvae feed on leaves and build new 
bags with foliage of the host plant attached. 
Larvae enlarge bag as they grow, then pupate 
in September. Winged males emerge several 
days later and mate with wingless females in 
bags. Female moths lay eggs and die; eggs 
overwinter.
Control: Handpick and destroy bags; 
spray with BTK in early spring; set out pher­
omone traps in August to catch males.
Copyrighted mi

BIGEYED BUGS 
■ 
273
Larvae and pupae
Bean Weevil A canthoscelides obtectus
Adulis and damage
tering adults emerge and feed, and lay eggs in 
pods. Larvae feed and pupate in seeds. In 
stored beans, eggs are laid on seeds and 
weevils breed year-round.
Control: At harvest, treat seeds and 
stored legumes with diatomaceous earth; 
remove bean plants from the garden immedi­
ately after harvest to reduce overwintering 
populations.
Adult and damage
Description: Adults: velvety gray or 
brow n,1 V'-'/s" weevils with pale lines on 
their backs and red legs. Larvae: white, fat 
grubs. Found throughout North America.
Damage: Adults feed on leaves and 
pods of beans, peas, and lentils. Larvae bore 
through freshly harvested and stored seeds, 
ruining them.
Life Cycle: As plants bloom, overwin­
Bigeyed Bugs Geocoris spp.
Adult
Description: Adults: fast-moving, V*"-1/*" 
bugs with large eyes, minute black spots on 
heads and thoraxes. Nymphs: similar to 
adults, but wingless. May be mistaken for
tarnished plant bugs. Common in western 
North America.
Beneficial Effect: Valuable predators of 
aphids, leafhoppers, plant bugs, spider mites, 
and small caterpillars in field crops and 
orchards.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs on stems 
an d  leaf u n d ersid es; eggs h atch  in 2 w eeks; 
nymphs develop for 4-6 weeks and then molt. 
Adults overwinter in garden trash.
How to Attract: Soybeans, pigweed, 
and goldenrod are favored sites for the bugs 
to lay eggs. Interplant crops with soybeans; 
leave weedy plants in borders.
Copyrighted material

274 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
Black Vine Weevil O tiorhynchus sulcatus
Adult and damage
Description: Adults: oblong, brownish 
black, ’A" weevils. Larvae: white grubs with 
yellowish heads; up to ’A". Eggs: tiny white 
eggs laid in soil. Found in northern United 
States and southern Canada.
Damage: Larvae feed on roots, and 
adults chew on leaves, damaging many types 
of broad- and narrow-leaved evergreen trees 
and shrubs, strawberries, and bramble fruits.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in soil, 
pupating in spring. Adults emerge in June. 
After 2 weeks, they lay eggs near the crowns 
of plants. Eggs hatch in 10 days; larvae 
burrow into soil and feed on roots. One 
generation per year.
Control: Shake weevils off plants at 
night onto a dropcloth and destroy them. 
Spray BTSD when adults are feeding on 
foliage. Apply parasitic nematodes to soil.
Blister Beetles (Family M eloidae)
Black blister beetle
Description: Adults: metallic black, blue, 
purple, or brown, 3A" long beetles with soft, 
elongated bodies, narrow '‘necks,” and long 
legs; beetles cling to plants when disturbed. 
Larvae: youngest are tiny, narrow, elongate 
grubs with large heads; later stages are 
progressively fatter with smaller heads, last 
stage are nearly legless. Found throughout 
North America.
Damage: Large numbers of adults feed­
Striped blister beetles 
and damage
ing on flowers and foliage of many types of 
flowers, shrubs, and vegetables rapidly defoli­
ate plants. Larvae of most species are bene­
ficial because they prey on grasshopper eggs.
Life Cycle: Overwintering larvae pupate 
in spring, adults emerge and lay eggs in 
midsummer in grasshopper egg burrows; 
larvae feed on eggs for a month, then 
overwinter in the burrows for up to 2 years. 
Most species have 1 generation per year,
Copyrighted material

BRACONID WASPS ■ 
275
coinciding with grasshopper life cycles.
Control: Except in areas where large 
adult populations do severe damage, tolerate 
adults to reap the beneficial effects of larvae. 
To kill adults, knock them from plants into a
pail of soapy water (wear gloves to avoid 
contact with crushed beetles, which cause 
skin burns); protect plants with floating row 
cover or screens in midsummer. For severe 
infestations, spray with pyrethrin.
B oxelder Bug Boisea triinttata
Adult
Description: Adults: '//' bugs with 
charcoal-colored wings with red veins. 
Nymphs: bright red. later marked with black. 
Found throughout North America.
Damage: Feeding causes deformities in 
flowers, leaves, shoots, or fruit of boxelder.
ash, and maple trees. Occasionally attacks 
other shade or fruit trees. Damage is usually 
not serious. Swarms of adults congregating in 
fall on walls and trees in preparation for 
hibernation may be a nuisance.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs in crevices, 
on foliage or seed pods; eggs hatch in 2 
weeks; nymphs feed on foliage until final 
molt to adults in July. Second generation 
matures by fall. Adult females overwinter in 
buildings or sheltered areas.
Control: Usually not necessary. For 
severely annoying infestations, spray with 
pyrethrin.
Adult 
Wasp cocoons 
Adult with
on tobacco homworm 
parasitized aphids
Description: Adults: slender, black or 
brown, '/io'-Vj" wasps with threadlike wfaists. 
Larvae: tiny cream-colored grubs that feed in 
or on other insects. Found throughout North 
America: some available commercially.
Beneficial Effect: Important native par­
asites of pests such as codling moths, elm 
bark beetles, cabbageworms, homworms, 
com borers, armyworms. aphids, and others. 
Some species attack flies and other insects.

276 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
Wasp larvae may develop inside the host 
insect. Or adult wasps may paralyze the host 
insect before laying eggs, and larvae then 
develop as external parasites.
Life Cycle: Females inject eggs into 
host insects, singly or in large numbers. 
When larvae complete development, they
spin cocoons on or near the dead host, then 
pupate. Several generations occur per year.
How to Attract: Grow nectar plants 
with small flowers such as dill, parsley, and 
yarrow. Although some species are available 
by mail order, the best course for the 
homeowner is to attract native populations.
Buffalo T reehopper Stictocephala bisonia
Adult
Description: Adults: green or yellowish, 
wedge-shaped, '/•*" bugs. Nymphs: green, 
humpbacked, with a spiny projection on 
their backs. Eggs: laid in crescent-shaped
slits in bark. Found throughout North America.
Damage: Females puncture bark of fruit 
tree twigs to lay eggs. Nymphs damage 
tomatoes, potatoes, alfalfa, clover, and grasses 
by sucking plant sap.
Life Cycle: Eggs overwinter in tree bark 
and hatch in spring, nymphs drop to ground 
and feed on grasses and other plants for 6 
weeks: after molting to adults, they return to 
trees to feed and lay eggs.
Control: Dormant oil sprays kill over­
wintering eggs; avoid alfalfa or clover cover 
crops where populations are damaging.
Bum blebees R am bus spp.
Description: Adults: plump, black-and- 
yellow, fuzzy, '/i"-1 " bees; active even in cold 
weather. Larvae: fat, white grubs. Common 
throughout North America.
Beneficial Effect: Important wild polli­
nators; commercially reared colonies used as
pollinators in greenhouses.
Life Cycle: Overwintering queen bee 
emerges from soil or leaf litter in May and 
makes nest on or below ground. The queen 
lays eggs in individual cells made of pollen; 
feeds developing larvae pollen and honey 
until they mature in 3-4 weeks to become 
workers. Workers collect pollen and nectar 
and rear subsequent 2 or 3 broods. In the fall, 
young queens develop and fly away to mate, 
and the colony breaks up.
How to Attract: Common in most 
gardens. Protect bees by minimizing pesti­
cide usage; apply in evening when bees are 
not active.
Adult
Copyrighted material

CABBAGE MAGGOT ■ 
277
Cabbage Looper Trichoplusia n i
Adult
Description: Adults: gray moths with a 
silver spot in the middle of each forewing 
(1 *A"-2" wingspan ). Larvae: green. 1 'A" cat­
erpillars with 2 white lines down their backs,
1 along each side; they move by looping their 
bodies. Kggs: light green, dome-shaped, on 
undersides of leaves. Common throughout 
most of 
nited States and southern Canada.
Damage: Larvae chew large holes in 
leaves of cabbage family plants and many 
other vegetable crops. May destroy whole 
plants.
Damage
Life Cycle: Moths emerge from over­
wintering pupae in May and lay eggs on 
leaves; larvae feed 2-4 weeks, then pupate 10 
days in cocoons attached to stems or leaves. 
Three to 4 generations per year.
Control: Handpick several times weekly: 
attract native parasitic wasps by planting 
pollen and nectar plants; till in crop residues 
before adults emerge in spring; spray larvae 
with BTK. For severe infestations, spray with 
garlic oil or pyrethrin.
Cabbage Maggot D elia rudicum  (= H ylem ya brassicae)
l/uvae on roots
Larva
Description: Adults: gray, ■/•" flies with 
long legs. Larvae: white, tapering, ’A" mag­
gots in roots. Found throughout North
America.
Adult female
Damage: Maggots boring into roots of 
cabbage family plants ruin root crops and 
stunt or kill plants. Wounds allow disease 
organisms to enter roots. First sign of injury

278 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
is usually wilting in midday.
Life Cycle: Adults emerge from over­
wintering pupae from late March onward. 
Females lay eggs in soil beside roots; larvae 
tunnel in roots 3-4 weeks, then pupate in 
soil for 2-3 weeks. Two to 4 generations 
per year.
Control: Cover seedlings with floating 
row cover, burying edges in soil; set out
transplants through slits in tar-paper squares 
to prevent the females from laying eggs; 
bum or destroy roots of cabbage family 
plants when harvesting tops; apply parasitic 
nematodes to soil around roots. If popula­
tions are moderate, repel females by mounding 
wood ashes, diatomaceous earth, hot pep­
per, or powdered ginger around base of 
stems.
Cankerw orm s ( Family G eom etridae)
Larvae and damage
Description: Adults: males are light gray 
moths (more than 1" wingspan); females are 
wingless with fuzzy, l/i" bodies. Larvae: 
slender, light green, yellow, or brown, x/i"-1" 
caterpillars with white stripes; they loop 
their bodies as they crawl. Eggs: gray-brown, 
round; laid in compact masses on plants. 
Found from Nova Scotia to North Carolina, 
west to Missouri, Montana, and Mani­
toba. Also found in Colorado, Utah, and 
California.
Damage: Larvae chew on young leaves 
and buds of apple trees and many deciduous 
shade trees and ornamental shrubs. They 
also feed on larger leaves, leaving only 
midribs and large veins. Heavily damaged 
trees look scorched.
Life Cycle: Adults emerge November to 
December and lay eggs on twigs and branches; 
eggs hatch in spring as first leaves open on 
trees. Larvae feed 3-4 weeks, then pupate 
in soil until early winter. One generation 
per year.
Control: Trap females in sticky tree 
bands as they climb trees to lay eggs; 
handpick and destroy egg masses on branches; 
spray with dormant oil to kill eggs; spray 
BTK to kill larvae.
i
Copyrighted matqr

C ARROT RUST FLY ■ 
279
C arrot Beetle Ligyrus (= B othynus)  gibbosus
Adult
Description: Adults: reddish brown or 
black, V2" beetles with rows of fine punctures 
on wing covers. Larvae: bluish white, C-shaped, 
1" grubs with brown heads. Found through­
out Nortn America.
Damage: Adults feed on roots of carrot 
family crops, beets, com , potatoes, sweet 
potatoes, and dahlias. Larvae feed on roots 
of grasses and cereal crops and on decaying 
matter. Damage worst in soils with high 
organic matter content.
Life Cycle: Adults overwinter in soil, 
emerging in spring to lay eggs in soil beside 
host plants. Eggs hatch in 1-3 weeks, larvae 
feed on roots until they pupate in late 
summer. One generation per year.
Control: Cultivate in fall to reduce 
overwintering populations; rotate crops.
C arrot Rust Fly Psila rosae
Adult
Damage
Description: Adults: shiny, metallic green­
ish black. 'A"flies with yellow legs and head. 
Larvae: white, tapering. '/»"maggots. Found 
throughout North America.
Damage: Maggots eat root hairs and 
tunnel through roots of carrot family plants, 
stunting or killing plants, ruining root crops, 
and allowing disease organisms to enter. 
Maggots also feed on roots in storage.
Life Cycle: Adults emerge mid-April to 
May, laying eggs in soil near plants. Larvae 
burrow into roots for 3-4 weeks, then pupate. 
Two to 3 generations per year.
Control: Cover seedbeds with floating 
row cover, burying edges in soil, before 
seedlings emerge. Leave plants covered until 
harvest; apply parasitic nematodes to soil.
Copyrighted material

280 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GL IDE
C arrot Weevil Listronotus oregonensis
Description: Adults: coppery brown, 
hard-shelled, 'A" weevils. Larvae: white, 
legless, C-shaped, *A" grubs with brown 
heads. Found in New England and eastern 
United States.
Damage: Larvae tunnel through stems 
and roots of carrot family plants, stunting or 
killing plants. Infested carrot roots and 
celery stalks may be unfit to harvest.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults emerge
from grass or garden litter in May, lay eggs on 
plant stems; larv ae bore into stems and 
downward into roots, then pupate in soil by 
late June. Second-generation adults emerge 
in July.
Control: Cover seedbeds with floating 
row cover; weev ils do not fly, so plant 
susceptible crops in uninfested areas; drench 
soil with parasitic nematodes.
C entipedes/M illipedes
Garden centipede 
House centipede
Description: Adults: slender, segmented 
creatures with many legs. Centipedes are 
1 "-5", have fewer, longer legs (with only 1 set 
of legs per segment), and move quickly; 
millipedes are ‘A'-l'A", move slowly, and 
have numerous short legs (with 2 sets of legs
Copyrighted mj
Millipede
per segment). Some millipedes curl up when 
disturbed.
Beneficial Effect: Both centipedes and 
millipedes are generally beneficial in the 
garden. Centipedes generally feed on soil- 
dwelling mites, insects, and insect larvae.

CHINCH BUG 
■ 
281
Millipedes usually feed on decaying plant 
tissue; they are beneficial in compost piles 
because they help break down organic 
matter.
Damage: Centipedes occasionally feed 
on plants and earthworms. Millipedes may 
feed on plant roots, germinating seeds, and
seedlings.
Life Cycle: Both lay eggs in soil. Eggs 
hatch into nymphs, which are similar to 
adults, but shorter, with fewer segments.
Control: Usually not needed; sprinkle 
wood ashes, diatomaceous earth, or cinders 
near rows of germinating seeds.
C hinch Bug B lissus leucopterus
Adult
Damage
Description: Adults: ‘A" bugs that have 
white forewings with a black triangular spot 
near margin. Nymphs: ’A" insects; youngest 
are bright red with a white stripe across the 
back; older nymphs are dark with white 
spots on the middle. Most common in 
eastern naif of United States and Canada.
Damage: Adults and nymphs suck sap 
from roots and stems of lawn grasses, corn, 
and cereal grain crops. Infested grass turns 
yellow, and patches may die off. Large 
infestations can devastate a grain crop or 
law n. These pests usually congregate in 
open, sunny parts of the lawn. They also 
smell bad. especially when crushed, and you 
may be able to detect the odor when you 
walk across a severely infested lawn.
Life Cycle: Adults emerge from over­
wintering sites in sod along fence rows and 
hedges. Females lay eggs on grass roots, eggs 
hatch in 1-3 weeks, and nymphs chew on 
roots until molting to adults in late June. Two 
generations per year, 3 in southern areas.
Control: Avoid chinch bug problems by 
planting endophyte-containing grass cultivars. 
In small lawns, soak sod with soapy water (1 
ounce liquid dish soap to 2 gallons water), 
then lay a flannel sheet over the grass to 
snare the bugs as they are driven out by the 
soapy solution; kill the bugs by washing them 
off the sheet in a bucket of soapy water. 
Encourage native predators—bigeyed bugs, 
minute pirate bugs, lacewings, lady beetles, 
and birds; bugs avoid shade, so shade base of 
crop plants by interplanting soybeans with 
corn or clover with grains.
Copyrighted material

282 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION G t’IDE
Codling M oth Cydia potnonella
Adult
A
External damage
Internal damage
Description: Adults: gray-brown moths; 
forewings with fine, white lines and brown 
tips, hindwings brown with pale fringes (3A" 
wingspan). Larvae: pink or creamy white, 7/«" 
caterpillars with brown heads. Eggs: flattened, 
white. Found throughout North America.
Damage: Larvae tunnel through apple, 
apricot, cherry, peach, pear, and plum fruit 
to center, ruining them.
Life Cycle: Overwintering larvae pupate 
in spring; adults emerge when apple trees 
bloom. Females lay eggs on fruit, leaves, or 
twigs; larvae burrow into fruit core, usually 
from blossom end, for 3-5 weeks, then leave 
fruit to pupate under tree bark or in ground
litter. Two to 3 generations per year, 5-8 
weeks apart.
Control: In early spring, scrape loose 
bark to remove overwintering cocoons and 
spray dormant oil: grow cover crops to 
attract native parasites and predators, espe­
cially ground beetles that eat pupae; use 
pheromone traps to determine main flight 
period for moths, then release parasitic 
Trichogramma wasps to attack eggs; trap 
larvae in tree bands, destroy daily; apply 
codling moth granulosis virus where available; 
in areas with severe infestations, spray pyre­
thrin when 75 percent of petals have fallen, 
followed by 3 sprays at 1-2 week intervals.
Lar\-a
Copyrighted

COLORADO POTATO BEETLE 
■ 
283
Colorado Potato Beetle Leptinotarsci decemlineata
Eggs, larvae and adult
Larva
Adult
Adults and larvae
Description: Adults: yellowish orange. 
’/j" beeties with 10 lengthwise, black stripes 
on wing covers, black spots on thoraxes. 
Larvae: dark orange, humpbacked, l/»n-l/i" 
grubs with a row of black spots along each 
side. Egi’s: bright yellow ovals, standing on 
end in clusters on undersides of leaves.
Found throughout North America.
Damage: Both adults and larvae chew 
leaves of potatoes, tomatoes, eggplants, and 
related plants, including petunias. Feeding 
can kill small plants and reduces yields of 
mature plants.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults emerge 
from soil in spring to feed on young plants; 
after feeding, females lay up to 1,000 eggs 
during their lifespan of several months. Eggs 
hatch in 4-9 days; larvae feed 2-3 weeks, then 
pupate in soil. Adults emerge in 5-10 days.
Two generations in most areas, 3 generations 
in southern states.
Control: When overwintering adults begin 
to emerge, shake adults from plants onto a 
dropcloth in the early morning. Dump 
beetles into soapy water. Attract native 
predators and parasites with pollen and 
nectar flowers; mulch plants with deep straw 
layer; cover plants with floating row cover 
until midseason; release 2-5 spined soldier 
bugs per square yard of plants; release 
parasitic wasp Edovum puttleri in southern 
areas to attack second-generation larvae; 
apply parasitic nematodes to soil to attack 
larvae as they prepare to pupate; apply 
double-strength sprays of BTSD on larvae; 
spray infested plants weekly with neem or 
pyrethrin.
Copyrighted material

284 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
C om  Earworm /Tom ato Fruitw orm
Helicoi>erpa (=Heliothis) zea
Larva and external damage 
Larva and internal damage Larva and damage
Adult
Description: Adults: tan moths (1 
wingspan). Larvae: I "-2" long, light yellow, 
green, pink, or brown; white and dark stripes 
along sides; yellow heads and black legs. Eggs: 
white, ribbed, and round. Found throughout 
North America; cannot overwinter in Canada, 
but migrates from United States in spring.
Dam age: Larvae burrow into ripe 
tomatoes, eat buds, and chew large holes in 
leaves. In corn, larvae feed on fresh silks, 
then move down ears eating kernels, leav ing 
trails of excrement. Early and late corn 
cultivars most affected. Larvae will also feed 
on a broad range of vegetable crops, fruits, 
and flowers.
Life Cycle: Adults emerge in early spring, 
migrating long distances to find food, if 
necessary. Females lay eggs on leaves or on 
tips of corn ears. Eggs hatch in 3 days, larvae
feed 2-4 weeks, then pupate in soil. Adults 
emerge in 10-25 days. One to 4 generations 
per year.
Control: Plant com cultivars with tight 
husks to prevent larvae from entering. After 
com silks start to dry, spray BTK into tips of 
ears, or apply granular BTK. Spray BTK on 
leaves and fruit of plants where fruitworms 
are feeding; attract native parasitic wasps 
and predatory bugs. Squirt parasitic nema­
todes into tips of corn ears or squirt mineral
oil on the tips; open corn husks and dig out 
larvae in tip before they damage main ear; 
release lacewings or minute pirate bugs. 
Paint pyrethrin-and-molasses bait (3 parts 
spray solution to 1 part molasses) around 
base of plants to kill emerging adults; use 
pheromone traps to monitor appearance of 
moths; spray with neem.
Copyrighted material

CUCUMBER BEETLE, STRIPED 
■ 
285
C ucum ber Beetle, Spotted/Southern C om
Rootworm Diabrotica undedmpunctata boivardi
Adult
Damage
Description: Adulis: greenish yellow, 
•A" beetles with 11 black spots on wing 
covers. Larvae: white, 'A" grubs with brown 
heads and brown patches on first and last 
segments. Found throughout the United 
States and southern Canada, east of the 
Rocky Mountains. Northern populations 
migrate north and south as seasons change, 
traveling up lo 500 miles in a few days.
Damage: Larvae feed on roots of com, 
often killing young plants: older plants are 
weakened and may topple easily. Adults feed 
on leaves and sometimes petals of squash 
family plants, other vegetable crops, and 
flowers. Both larvae and adults can transmit
cucumber mosaic virus and bacterial wilt.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults emerge 
from under crop residues in spring, lay eggs 
in soil close to plants. Eggs hatch and larvae 
feed in roots and crown of plants for 2-4 
weeks, then pupate. One or 2 generations in 
northern areas, 3 in southern areas.
Control: Remove and destroy crop resi­
dues where adults overwinter: rotate garden 
crops with cover crops such as alfalfa: cover 
seedlings or plants with floating row cover, 
hand-pollinating covered squash family plants: 
apply parasitic nematodes to soil weekly to 
control larvae; control adults by spraying 
with pyrethrin.
C ucum ber Beetle, Striped Acalynnma vittatum
Adult and damage
Description: Adults: yellow, elongate. 
'A" beetles with black heads and 3 wide 
black stripes on wing covers. Larvae: slender.
white grubs. Found in United States west to 
Colorado and New Mexico: in Canada, west 
to Saskatchewan.
Damage: Adults feed on squash family 
plants, beans, com , peas, and blossoms of 
many garden plants. The beetles swarm on 
seedlings, feeding on leaves and young shoots, 
often killing plants: they also attack stems 
and flowers of older plants and eat holes in 
fruit. Feeding can transmit wilt and mosaic 
viruses. Larvae feed on roots of squash 
family plants only, killing or stunting plants.

286 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
Life Cycle: Adults overwinter in dense 
grass or under leaves, emerging in April to 
early June. They eat weed pollen for 2 weeks, 
then move to crop plants, laying eggs in soil 
at base of plants. Eggs hatch in 10 days; 
larvae burrow into soil, feed on roots for 2-6 
weeks, pupate in early August. Adults emerge 
in 2 weeks to feed on blossoms and maturing 
fruit. One to 2 generations per year.
Control: Cover seedlings or plants with 
floating row cover, and hand-pollinate cov­
ered squash family plants; pile deep straw 
mulch around plants to discourage beetles 
from moving between plants; apply parasitic 
nematodes to soil to control larvae; spray 
with pyrethrin when adults are seen feeding 
on pollen in flowers.
Variegated cutworm
Variegated cutworm adult
Description: Adults: brown or gray moths 
(V/t"wingspan). Larvae: fat,greasy-looking, 
gray or dull brown, 1 "-2" caterpillars with 
shiny heads. Found throughout North America.
Damage: At night, caterpillars feed on 
stems of vegetable and flower seedlings and 
transplants near the soil line, severing them 
or completely consuming small seedlings. 
During the day they rest below soil surface, 
curled beside plant stems.
Life Cycle: Some species overwinter as 
pupae; adults emerge and lay eggs on grass 
or soil surface from early May to early June. 
Eggs hatch in 5-7 days, larvae feed on grass 
and other plants for 3-5 weeks, then pupate 
in soil. Adults emerge late August to early 
September. Other species overwinter as eggs 
that hatch during first warm days and feed 
on early seedlings. One generation per year; 
a late second generation may damage
Cutworm s (Family N octuidae)
Army cutworm and damage
Copyrighted material

DIAMONDBACK MOTH 
■ 
287
crops in warm fall weather.
Control: Put collars made of paper, 
cardboard, or plastic around transplant stems 
at planting, pushing collars into soil until 
about half of the collar is below soil level. One 
week before setting out plants, scatter moist
bran mixed with BTK and molasses over 
surface of beds; apply parasitic nematodes to 
soil; dig around base of damaged transplants 
in the morning and destroy larvae hiding 
below soil surface; set out transplants later in 
the season to avoid damage.
Dam sel Bugs (Family Nabidae)
Adult
Description: Adults: elongate, gray or 
brown, fast-moving. Vs"-1/*" bugs. Nymphs: 
slender wingless, smaller than adults. Found 
throughout North America.
Beneficial Effect: Important native pred­
ators of aphids, leafhoppers, plant bugs, 
thrips, and small caterpillars. Commonly 
found in unsprayed alfalfa fields.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs in plant 
tissue, eggs hatch in 1 week; nymphs imme­
diately begin feeding, often on prey larger 
than themselves. Nymphs develop 3-4 weeks 
until molt to adults. Adults overwinter. Two 
or more generations per season.
HOW to Attract: You can collect damsel 
bugs in alfalfa fields using a sweep net, and 
release them around the garden.
D iam ondback M oth Plutella xyllostellci
Larva and damage
Adult
Description: Adults: xh n moths with 
light diamond pattern visible on the back 
when wings are folded; wing tips flare 
upward. Larvae: W
 and pale green with
light brown heads. Found throughout North 
America.
Damage: Youngest larvae mine tunnels 
in leaves of cabbage family plants and weeds.

288 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
Older larvae chew small, irregular holes in 
leaves, bore into cabbage heads, and chew 
curds of cauliflower and broccoli.
Life Cycle: Adults overwinter in mild 
climates. In spring females lay eggs on 
leaves; eggs hatch in a few days; larvae feed
for 2 weeks, then pupate. Adults emerge in 
7-10 days. Three to 6 generations per year.
Control: Cover crops with floating row 
cover; attract and conserve native parasites 
and predators, including birds; spray BTK to 
kill larvae.
Elm Bark Beetles
Scolytus multistriatiis and Hylurgopinus rufipes
Smaller European elm 
bark beetle
Damage
Description: Adults: shiny, cylindrical, 
dark reddish brown, '/io" beetles with fine 
punctures in rows along wing covers; heads 
curved downward under broad thoraxes. 
Larvae: fat, C-shaped grubs with brown 
heads, living under bark. Found throughout 
United States except in the north-central 
states; also found in southern Ontario and 
New Brunswick.
Damage: Larvae and adults live in gal­
leries engraved in a radiating pattern under 
the bark of elm trees. The tunneling does not 
cause serious damage to the trees. However, 
adults carry Dutch elm disease fungi on their 
bodies and infect healthy trees when they 
bore into bark.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults emerge
from holes in bark in spring; they feed in 
crotches of elm twigs, later moving to recently 
cut, dead, or dying elms. They carve galleries 
between the wood and inner bark and lay 
eggs. Each larva feeds in a separate branch 
of the gallery and pupates in a cell at the 
end; adults emerge in 10-14 days. Some 
species overwinter under the bark as larvae, 
others as adults. One to 3 generations per year.
Control: Maintain healthy trees; bury or 
burn all diseased or dying elms in the area to 
eliminate sources of disease: plant cultivars 
resistant to Dutch elm disease; trap adult 
beetles with pheromone traps; conserve 
braconid wasps {Dendrosoter protuberans), 
which were released in the eastern United 
States to parasitize the beetles.
Copyrighted material

FLATHHADED APPLETREK BORER 
■ 
289
Com B orer Ostrinia nubilalis
luir\a in com ear 
Larva in com stem
Description: Adults: females pale yel­
lowish brown with darker zigzag patterns 
across wings (1" wingspan); males darker- 
colored Larvae: beige with small brown 
spots, up to 1". Eggs: white, overlapping, laid 
in masses of 15-20 on undersides of leaves. 
Found throughout northern and central 
United States and central and eastern Canada.
Damage: Young larvae feed on corn 
leaves and tassels and beneath husks. Older 
larvae burrow in com  stalks and ears; dam­
aged stalks may break. Larvae also tunnel in 
stems or pods of beans, onions, peppers, 
potatoes, tomatoes, and other crops.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in plant 
residue and pupate in early spring. Adults
Adult
emerge in June: lay eggs late June to mid- 
July. Eggs hatch after 1 week; larvae feed for 
3-4 weeks. One to 3 generations per year.
Control: Plant resistant com cultivars; 
remove tassels from two-thirds of com  plants 
before they begin to shed pollen; spray BTK 
on leaf undersides and into tips of ears; apply 
granular BTK or mineral oil in tips of ears: 
rotate crops; release Trichogramma wasps 
for control in large fields; attract native 
parasites by allowing flowering weeds to 
grow between rows: pull out and destroy all 
infested crop residue immediately after 
harvest. For severe infestations, spray pyrethrin 
when larvae begin feeding on leaves, tassels, 
or ears.
Flat headed A ppletree B orer Chrysobvthris fem om ta
Larva 
Adult
Description: Adults: flat, dark bronze, 
throughout United States and eastern Can-
xk" beetles. Larvae: white, legless grubs with 
ada; similar species on Pacific Coast,
brown, retracted heads; up to I1//'. Found 
Damage: Adults feed on leaves of most

290 ■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GLIDE
fruit and shade trees, and larvae tunnel into 
sapwood of young trees and under bark of 
older trees, forming galleries filled with 
castings. Attacked bark exudes gummy sap, 
turns dark, and dies; whole trees may be 
killed. Young trees or those in poor condi­
tion most susceptible.
Life Cycle: Grubs overwinter in cham­
bers in wood, pupate in spring. Adults 
emerge May to July and lay eggs in cracks in
bark. When eggs hatch, grubs tunnel under 
bark for rest of summer but are usually 
unable to complete development on vigorous 
trees. May take 2 years to complete life cycle.
Control: Maintain healthy, vigorous trees; 
avoid injury to bark; remove injured limbs as 
soon as damage occurs; protect trunks of 
young trees with white latex paint diluted 
with an equal amount of water, or wrap with 
paper or burlap to prevent attack.
Flea Beetles (Family Chrysomelidae)
Damage
Steel blue flea beetle
Description: Adults: black, brown, or 
bronze, '/io "  beetles with well-developed 
hind legs; jump like fleas when disturbed. 
Larvae: thin, white, legless grubs with brown 
heads, up to 
living in soil. Found 
throughout North America.
Damage: Adults chew numerous small, 
round holes in leaves of most vegetable crops 
as well as many flowers and weeds. They are 
most damaging in early spring. Seedlings 
may be killed, larger plants usually survive. 
Larvae feed on plant roots. Adults may 
spread viral diseases as they feed.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults emerge 
from soil in spring; they feed and lay eggs on 
plant roots, then die by early July. Eggs hatch 
in 1 week, larvae feed 2-3 weeks, then pupate 
in soil; adults emerge in 2-3 weeks. One to 4 
generations per year.
Control: Delay planting to avoid peak 
populations; cover seedlings with row cover 
until adults die off. Flea beetles prefer full 
sun, so interplant crops to provide shade for 
susceptible plants; drench roots with insect 
parasitic nematodes to control larvae; spray 
with neem or pyrethrin.
Copyrighted m

FRUIT BORERS ■ 
291
Fruit B orers S yn a nthedon  spp.
Raspberry crown borer
Rhododendron borer
Rhododendron borer adult
External damage
Description: Adults: wasplike moths have 
clear u ings with darker markings and black
or black-and-yellow striped, 1" bodies. Lar­
vae: pale yellow or white with dark heads, 
boring into canes or crowns. Found through­
out North America.
Damage: Larvae bore into stems of 
currants, gooseberries, raspberries, and 
rhododendrons. Their tunneling can weaken 
canes, causing them to break easily, or can 
kill entire canes. Larvae boring into crowns 
girdle canes and destroy new shoots. These 
specie:; are related to peachtree borers.
Lite Cycle: Larvae overwinter in canes
and pupate in early May; adults emerge in 2 
weeks. Eggs are laid on canes and hatch in 10 
days; larvae tunnel in canes all summer, 
remaining in canes for winter. Rhododen­
dron borer larvae spend the winter in crowns 
of plants and work their way up into canes by 
July, pupating under the bark, several inches 
above the soil line; adults emerge in a month.
Control: Prune and burn all affected 
canes, remove infested plants; smash old 
stubs of plants with a mallet to kill pupae and 
larvae; try spraying superior oil in late May 
to kill eggs.
Copyrighted m

292 ■ INSECT IDENTIFICATION (,UII)E
Fruit Flies Rhagoletis spp. and Cem titis capitata
<
•
1
Damage
I
i
t 
i
tures in fruit skin or around stems. Eggs 
hatch within 1 week. larvae tunnel in fruit 
until it drops, then leave fruit to pupate and 
overwinter in the soil. Most species have I 
generation per year; in very warm regions 
generations may continue all year.
Confrol: Pick up fallen fruit and destroy 
daily during summer, weekly in fall; hang 
yellow sticky traps baited with vials of 1 part 
ammonia and 1 part water or commercial 
fruit fly attractants in trees (1-2 traps per 
tree); encourage ground beetles and rove 
beetles, which feed on fly pupae, by planting 
groundcovers in orchards.
pupae m m -June o r later, lay eggs m punc-
i
I
Mediterranean fruit fly
Walnut husk fly
Currant fruit fly
Description: Adults: '//' flies with yellow 
or white markings on their bodies, and 
transparent wings patterned with dark, cross­
wise bands. Larvae: white, '/•»" maggots 
feeding in fruit. Found throughout North 
America.
Damage: Larvae tunnel extensively 
through fruit of blueberry, currant, plum, 
cherry, and peach. Certain species also feed 
on walnut, citrus, and coffee. Infested fruit 
shrivels or drops early: earliest cultivars 
suffer the most damage. In walnut, main 
injury is shell staining.
Life Cycle: Adult flies emerge from
Copyrighted material

GALL WASPS ■ 
293
Lan\ t and damage
Description: Adults: golden brown, mot­
tled moths W
 wingspan). Larvae: green 
caterpillars with brown heads. Eggs: light 
yellowish brown with brown coating. Found 
throughout North America.
Damage: Larvae spin webs at branch 
tips of roses and most fruit and ornamental 
trees and feed on enclosed buds, leaves, and 
developing fruit.
Life Cycle: Eggs hatch in early spring.
Larvae feed for 1 month, spin webs, and 
pupate within rolled leaves or in cocoons on 
bark. Adults emerge late June or July and lay 
overwintering eggs on bark.
Control: Scrape egg masses from branches 
in winter: apply dormant oil sprays to kill 
eggs: handpick caterpillars from young trees 
weekly: attract native parasitic wasps: apply 
B T K  to larvae before they spin webs: spray 
serious infestations with pyrethrin.
Gall
Gall and larvae
Description: Adults: brown or reddish, 
tiny wasps, rarely seen. Larvae: legless white 
grubs. Most common in western United 
States and Canada: some occur in the East.
Damage: Larvae feed on oaks, roses, 
thistles, and other plants. Plants respond by 
producing galls—enlarged masses of cells—of 
various shapes, attached to stems or leaves.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults emerge
Galls
from winter galls, usually on roots or fallen 
leaves: females lay eggs on host plants in 
early spring; feeding larvae stimulate gall 
formation, which serves as food and protects 
larvae. Adults emerge in summer and lay 
eggs that form overwintering galls.
Control: Usually not necessary: prune 
galls from roses or shrubs and destroy.

294 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION (it UDE
G rasshoppers ( Family Acrididae)
Adult
Description: Adults: brown, yellow, or 
green, 1 "-2" insects with leathery forewings 
and enlarged hind legs: many have brightly 
colored underwings. Nymphs: similar to 
adults, but smaller. Found throughout North 
America.
Damage: Adults eat any kind of vege­
tation. In most areas of North America, 
economic damage occurs only in fields of 
grass or cereal crops. Little damage occurs to
home gardens; on rare occasions swarms of 
grasshoppers devastate agricultural crops 
over large areas.
Life Cycle: In late summer females 
deposit elongate masses of eggs in soil; eggs 
hatch in spring; nymphs develop for 40-60 
days until molting to adults. Adults feed until 
killed by cold weather. Swarms appear as a 
result of interaction of weather and biologi­
cal influences.
Control: Usually controlled by natural 
enemies (blister beetle larvae, ground beetles, 
predatory flies, birds, parasitic nematodes, 
fungal dieases); cultivate fields in fall to kill 
overwintering eggs; aerial sprays of commer­
cial protozoan disease (Nosema locustae) 
may be effective over large areas but is not 
useful on a hom e-garde.n scale.
G round Beetles
Larva and prey 
Larva
Description: Adults: blue-black or brown, 
3/*"-l" beetles, usually iridescent; thorax 
well-defined, usually narrower than abdomen. 
Beetles hide under stones or other cover 
during the day. Larvae: dark brown or black 
grubs with 10 segments, tapering markedly 
toward the rear. Common throughout North 
America.
Beneficial Effect: There are more than 
2,500 species of ground beetles. They prey 
on slugs, snails, cutworms, cabbage root 
maggots, and many other pests that have a 
soil-dwelling stage. Some species also pursue 
prey that live on plants or trees, such as 
Colorado potato beetle larvae, gypsy moths, 
and tent caterpillars. A single larva can eat
Adult

GYPSY MOTH 
■ 
295
more than 50 caterpillars; adults may live as 
long as 2-3 years and are fiercely voracious.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults emerge 
from pupal cell and lay eggs in soil. Larvae 
feed on insects and slugs for 2-4 weeks, then 
pupate in soil. Adults remain in soil for the 
winter, emerging in spring.
HOW to Attract: Provide permanent beds 
and perennial plantings in garden to protect 
populations; plant white clover groundcover 
in orchards; make permanent stone, sod, or 
clover pathways throughout garden to pro­
vide refuges.
Gypsy M oth Lymantria dispar
Adult laying eggs
Larva
Description: Adults: females nearly white, 
1" moths with heavy bodies, unable to fly; 
males are smaller, darker, strong fliers. Lar­
vae: up to 2'A", gray-brown caterpillars with 5 
pairs o'’ blue dots and 6 pairs of red dots on 
back, long hairs in tufts on body. Eggs: in 
masses under fuzzy yellow covering. Found in 
eastern and central United States and eastern 
Canada; isolated outbreaks in California and 
other western areas. Dispersal depends on 
human activity (trucking, camping, etc.) to 
move eggs, larvae, pupae to new areas.
Damage: Larvae feed on leaves of many 
trees and shrubs, including conifers; heavy 
infestations can defoliate trees. Repeated 
defoliations eventually kill deciduous trees; a 
single defoliation kills conifers.
Adult
Life Cycle: Overwintering eggs on tree 
trunks hatch in May, larvae feed in trees until 
mid-July, then pupate for several weeks. 
Adults emerge late July to early August. 
Females crawl up nearby trees or other 
objects to deposit egg masses that overwinter.
Control: Attract predators and parasites 
(especially tachinid flies, ground beetles, and 
parasitic wasps); prevent movement of pest 
by checking trailers, boats, camping gear, 
and so on for egg masses or larvae before 
leaving an infested region; use pheromone 
traps to catch males for monitoring or to pre­
vent mating; spray BTK to kill larvae; wrap 
burlap tree bands around fruit and shade 
trees, check daily and destroy hiding larvae.
Copyrighted material

296 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUDE
H oneybee Ajris mellifera
Adult 
Adult
Description: Adults: gold-and-black 
striped, W  bees with translucent wings. 
Larvae: white grubs in wax combs in hives. 
Found throughout North America.
Beneficial Effect: Extremely important 
pollinators of fruit, vegetables, and agricul­
tural crops.
Life Cycle: Bees live in social colonies 
numbering up to 20.000. Queen bees lay eggs 
in wax cells in hives; workers feed and care
for larvae, feeding those destined to become 
new queens a special diet of royal jelly. Males 
mate with new queens, who leave with 
swarms to start new colonies. Bees overwin­
ter clustered in hives, living on stored honey.
How to Attract: Plant pollen and nectar 
plants: provide a water source in dry weather; 
avoid spraying fruit trees when flowers are in 
bloom; if you must apply insecticides, spray 
in evenings after bees return to hive.
( Family Syrphidac)
Hover Flies/Flow er Flies
Larva
Adult
Adult
Description: Adults: yellow- or white* 
and-black striped, V i'-W flies,often seen 
hovering like hummingbirds over flowers. 
Larvae: gray or greenish, somewhat translucent, 
sluglike maggots. Eggs: white cylinders laid 
singly or in small groups near aphids. Various 
species common throughout North America.
Beneficial Effect: Larvae feed on many 
species of aphids. Common native predators 
in orchards.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs among 
aphids; eggs hatch in 2-3 days; larvae feed on 
aphids for 3-4 weeks, then drop to the soil to 
pupate. Adults emerge after 2 weeks. Two to
4 generations per year.
How to Attract: Plant pollen and nectar 
flowers; allow flowering weeds such as wild 
carrot and yarrow to grow between crop 
plants.

IMPORTED CABBAGEWORM ■ 297
Ichneum on W&sps (Family Ichneumonidae)
Adult
Adult
Description: Adults: slender, dark- 
colored. ‘/lo'-l'/a" wasps with long antennae. 
Some species have threadlike ovipositors, as 
much us .V' long (sometimes mistaken for 
stingers) Larvae: white, tapering grubs. 
Numerous species found throughout North 
America.
Beneficial Effect: Larvae develop as par­
asites of caterpillars, sawfly and beetle larvae, 
and other insects. Females also kill hosts by 
stinging them and feeding on body fluids. 
Ichneumon wasps are extremely important
as native biological controls.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs inside host 
eggs or larvae: wasp larvae develop inside 
hosts, eventually killing hosts and pupating 
in or on them. Many species overwinter as 
mature larvae in cocoons: in some species 
adult females overwinter. One to 3 genera­
tions per year usual: some with up to 10 
generations.
How to Attract: Plant pollen and nectar 
flowers in gardens; grow flowering cover 
crops in orchards to attract females.
Im ported Cabbageworm  Artogeia (= Pieris ) rapae
Larva 
Adult
Description: Adults: common white but­
terflies; forewings with black tips and 2 or 3 
spots (1 */:'-2" wingspan). Larvae: up to 1 x/*\ 
velvety green caterpillars with a fine yellow 
stripe down the back. Eggs: yellow cones
laid on undersides of leaves. Found through­
out North America.
Damage: Larvae eat large, ragged holes 
in leaves and heads of cabbage family plants, 
soiling leaves with dark green droppings.
3l

298 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION C,l IDE
Life Cycle: Adults emerge from over­
wintering pupae in early spring to lay eggs. 
Larvae feed for 2-3 weeks, then pupate in 
debris on soil surface: adults emerge in 1-2 
weeks. Three to 5 overlapping generations 
per year: all ages of larvae present all season.
Iris B orer Macronoctua otnisUi
Description: Adults: moths with dark 
brown forewings, yellowish hind wings (2" 
wingspan). Larvae: fat. pinkish borers with 
brown heads and a light stripe down the 
back, rows of black dots on sides: up to 2" 
long. Found in eastern United States west to 
Iowa, and in Quebec and eastern Ontario.
Control: Cover plants with floating row 
cover: handpick larvae in light infestations; 
use yellow sticky traps to catch female 
butterflies. As a last resort, spray with BTK 
at 1-2 week intervals.
Damage: Young larvae tunnel within 
leaves, leaf sheaths, and buds of iris, moving 
down into crowns and rhizomes as they 
develop. Soft rots usually follow larval damage.
Life Cycle: Eggs overwintering on old 
leaves hatch in late April or early May. 
Larvae enter leaves, feed for several weeks, 
then pupate in soil near rhizomes: adults 
emerge in late summer and lay eggs.
Control: Remove and destroy dead iris 
leaves and stems in late fall to eliminate 
overwintering eggs; dig infested rhizomes, 
remove larvae and pupae, dip in sulfur 
fungicide or other antibiotic before replant­
ing if soft rot present.
Larvae and damage
Japanese Beetle \ \ ) p i l l i a  japonica
Larva
Adult
Description: Adults: chunky, metallic 
blue-green, l/T' beetles with bronze wing 
covers, long legs, and fine hairs covering
Adulis and damage
body. Larvae: fat, dirty white grubs with 
brown heads; up to V«"; found in sod. Found 
in all states east of the Mississippi River.

JUNE/MAY BEETLES ■ 299
Damage: Adults eat flowers and skele­
tonize leaves of a broad range of plants; 
plants may be completely defoliated. Larvae 
feed on roots of lawn grasses and garden 
plants.
Life? Cycle: Overwintering larvae deep 
in the soil move toward the surface in spring 
to feed on roots, pupating in early summer. 
Adults emerge, feed on plants, and lay eggs 
in late summer; eggs hatch into larvae 
that overwinter in soil. One generation
occurs every 1-2 years.
Control: In early morning, shake bee­
tles from plants onto dropcloths, then drown 
them in soapy water; cover plants with 
floating row cover; apply milky disease 
spores or parasitic nematodes to sod to kill 
larvae; attract native species of parasitic 
wasps and flies; organize a community-wide 
trapping program to reduce adult beetle 
population; spray plants attacked by beetles 
with neem.
June/M ay Beetles Phyllophaga spp.
Larva 
Adult
Description; Adults: blocky,3/ / ' beetles 
with tip of abdomen showing behind wings; 
most are shiny brown or black, some with 
stripes on back or fine hairs on body. Larvae: 
fat, C-shaped. white grubs with dark heads. 
Found throughout North America.
Damage: Larvae feed on roots of corn, 
potatoes, grasses, vegetable transplants, and 
strawberries. Adults feed on leaves of many 
species of trees and shrubs.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs in balls of 
earth in soil; eggs hatch in 2-3 weeks. Grubs 
feed on decaying vegetation the first summer.
hibernate in the soil and feed on plant roots 
the second summer. After hibernating again, 
they feed until June of the third summer, 
then pupate 2-3 weeks. Adults remain in 
pupal cells in the soil until spring of the 
fourth year, when they emerge to feed and 
lay eggs. Largest broods appear in 3-year 
cycle; some species with 1- or 4-year life cycles.
Control: Populations usually suppressed 
by native predators and parasites: where 
infestations are severe, apply milky disease 
spores or parasitic nematodes to the soil to 
control grubs.
Copyrighted

300 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
Lace Bugs ( Family Tingidac)
Adult 
Damage
Description: Adults: oval or rectangular. 
Vs" bugs with lacy pattern and wide, flat­
tened extensions on thoraxes. Nymphs: smaller, 
darker, covered with spines. Eggs: inserted in 
leaves along midribs on undersides with 
conelike caps projecting from leaves. Found 
throughout North America.
Damage: Adults and nymphs suck juices 
from undersides of leaves of flowers, trees, 
and vegetable plants, spotting leaves with
excrement and leaving speckled white or 
gray, blotchy appearance on leaf surfaces.
Life Cycle: Most species overwinter in 
egg stage, some as adults under bark of trees. 
Eggs hatch into nymphs that feed for several 
weeks until molting to adults. Three or more 
generations per year.
Control: Spray superior oil (not on chry­
santhemum flowers); spray with pyrethrin as 
a last resort.
spp.
Common green lacewing
Lacewings Chrysoperla ( Chrysopa)
Common green lacewing 
Common green lacewing
larvae and eggs 
larva and prey
Description: Adults: fragile, green or 
brown, W - W  insects with small heads, large 
eyes, and netted, transparent wings. Larvae: 
spindle-shaped, mottled yellow or brown.
Eggs: laid on tips of fine stalks. Found 
throughout North America; sold commercially.
Beneficial Effect: Common general pred­
ators in gardens and orchards.
Life Cycle: Adults or pupae overwinter;
adults emerge in spring to lay eggs. Eggs 
hatch in 4-7 days; larvae feed for about 3 
weeks, then pupate for 5-7 days. Three to 4 
generations per year.
How to Attract: Plant pollen and nectar 
flowers; allow some flowering weeds to grow 
between rows; provide water source; scatter 
purchased eggs widely throughout garden.
Copyrighted me

LADY BEETLES ■ 
301
Lady Beedes
Convergent 
lady beetle larx-a
(Family C occinellidae)
r \ >
il**-/. 
^  
K
Convergent lady beetle 
larvae pupating
Convergent lady beetle 
and prey
Spider nite destroyer
Twicestabbed 
lady beetle larva
Description: Adults: shiny, round, V*"- 
3/s" beetles with short legs and antennae. 
Common species are pale yellow to dark 
reddish orange with or without black spots: 
some species solid black or black with red 
spots. Larvae: spindle-shaped, alligator-like, 
usually with short spines or knoblike projec­
tions on body. Eggs: white or yellow ovals, 
usually deposited in upright clusters. Numer­
ous species common throughout North Amer­
ica; convergent lady beetle (Hippodamia 
convergent) sold commercially.
Beneficial Effect: Adults and larvae of 
many species feed on aphids and soft-bodied 
pests: some species prefer mealybugs, spider 
mites, or soft scales. Native lady beetles are 
important biological controls for aphids in 
gardens and orchards. In western regions, 
Stethoms spp. provide excellent control of
Twicestabbed lady beetle
spider mites in raspberries and other crops. 
Chilocorus spp. are voracious predators of 
soft scales. A few species, such as Mexican 
bean beetles, are plant pests.
Life Cycle: In spring, overwintering adults 
seek food, then lay eggs among aphids or 
other prey. Eggs hatch in 3-5 days, larvae 
feed 2-3 weeks, then pupate. Adults emerge 
in 7-10 days. In fall, local species overwinter 
as adults in leaf litter; H. convergens migrates 
to Sierra Nevada Mountains to overwinter in 
large groups.
How to Attract: Plant pollen and nectar 
flowers; leave weeds such as dandelions, wild 
carrot, and yarrow between crop plants; 
purchased H. convergens is effective in 
greenhouses with screened vents but is not 
advisable for release in gardens, because they 
will fly away.
Copyrighted m

Leafhoppers ( Family C icadellidac)
302 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION C.t IDE
_
Beet leafhopper
Potato leafhoppcr
Damage
Damage
Kedbanded leaf hopper
Description: Adults: wedge-shaped, 
slender, green or brown, Vio'-'/z" insects: a 
forward point above the head is very pro­
nounced in some species. Some have brightly 
colored bands on wings: all jump rapidly into 
flight when disturbed. Nymphs: pale, wingless, 
similar to adults: hop rapidly when disturbed. 
Found throughout North America.
Damage: Adults and nymphs suck juices 
from stems and undersides of leaves of most 
fruit and vegetable crops, also some flowers 
and weeds. Their toxic saliva distorts and 
stunts plants and causes tipburn and yellowed, 
curled leaves with white spots on undersides. 
Fruit may be spotted with drops of excre­
ment and honeydew. Pests may spread viral
diseases as they feed.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults start 
laying eggs in spring when leaves begin to 
appear on trees. Some species do not survive 
winter in northern United States and in 
Canada: they migrate from the south every 
summer. Females lay eggs in leaves and 
stems; eggs hatch in 10-14 days, nymphs 
develop for several weeks. Most species have
2-5 generations per year, overwintering as 
adults or eggs.
Control: Wash nymphs from plants with 
stiff sprays of water; attract natural enemies 
(predatory flies and bugs and parasitic wasps); 
spray with insecticidal soap. As a last resort, 
spray with neem or pyrethrin.
Copyrighted m

MEALYBUG DESTROYER 
■ 
303
Leafm iners ( Family Agromyzidae )
Description: Adults: black or black* 
and-yellow. Vio" flies: rarely seen. Larvae: 
pale green, stubby, translucent, W ' maggots, 
found in tunnels in leaves. Eggs: white, 
cylindrical, laid in clusters on undersides of 
leaves. Several species found throughout 
North America.
Damage: Larvae tunnel within leaves of 
many vegetable crops and ornamentals.
They feed on leaf tissue and make round or 
winding, hollow mines, often destroying 
seedlings. On larger vegetables, more of a 
nuisance than serious problem: damaging on 
ornamentals because mines are unsightly.
Adult
Damage
Damage
Life Cycle: Adults emerge from over­
wintering cocoons in early spring and lay 
eggs on leaves. Larvae mine leaves for 1-3 
weeks, then drop to soil to pupate 2-4 weeks. 
Two to 3 generations per year, more in 
greenhouses.
Control: Cover seedlings with floating 
row cover: pick and destroy mined leaves 
and remove egg clusters; remove nearby 
dock or lamb's-quarters, which are hosts for 
beet leafminers; attract native parasitic wasps 
by planting nectar plants; spray with neem or 
avermectins.
M ealybug D estroyer Cryptolaemus m ontrouzieri
Larva 
Adult
Description: Adults: oval. Vi" beetles 
hair. Eggs: yellow ovals. Native to California
with black wing covers, head and tip of 
and western coastal region of United States;
abdomen is coral-colored. Larvae: cream- 
sold commercially,
colored segmented, covered with long, waxy 
Beneficial Effect: Both adults and lar-

304 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
vae prey on aboveground species of mealy­
bugs on citrus, grapes, and ornamentals. Good 
controls for greenhouses and on houseplants.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs among 
mealybug egg masses; eggs hatch in 8-10 
days, larvae eat mealybug eggs and young 
mealybugs for 3 weeks, then pupate on 
plants. Adults emerge in 2-3 weeks. Adults 
overwinter in mild coastal climates; genera­
tions continue year-round indoors.
HOW to Attract: Conserve native popu­
lations by avoiding pesticides; release 250-500 
in small orchards or vineyards; release 2-5 
per infested plant in interior plantings, twice 
yearly; on houseplants, confine 10-20 adults 
per plant for 4-5 weeks by draping sheer 
curtain material over plant and tying it 
around the pot.
M ealybugs (Family P scudococcidae)
Citrus mealy bugs 
Longtailed mealybugs
Description: Adults: females are soft, 
oval, Vio" insects with distinctly segmented, 
pinkish bodies covered by white waxy fluff; 
males are tiny, 2-winged insects; rarely seen. 
Nymphs: similar to adults, but smaller. Most 
species found in southern United States, 
longtailed mealybug throughout North Amer­
ica; all species found in greenhouses.
Damage: Adults and nymphs suck plant 
juices from many types of fruit crops, 
avocados, potatoes, ornamentals, and tropi­
cal foliage plants. They feed on all parts of a 
plant, particularly new growth, causing leaves 
to wither and yellow and fruit to drop pre­
maturely. Honeydew excreted on leaves sup­
ports the growth of sooty mold fungus.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs in a fluffy 
white mass; eggs hatch in 10 days and 
crawlers wander away to find feeding sites 
where they develop for 1-2 months or longer. 
Several generations per year.
Control: Rinse plants with stiff streams 
of water to dislodge mealybugs; spray with 
insecticidal soap; release mealybug destroy­
ers (Cryptolaemus montrouzieri) in citrus or 
grape plantings or on indoor plants; for 
citrus mealybugs release parasitic wasp 
Leptomastix dactylopii; attract native para­
sitic wasps, which usually keep populations 
in check outdoors.
Copyrighted material

MEXICAN BEAN BEETLE 
■ 
305
Bean Beetle Epilachna varivestis
Larvae and damage
larvae feed 2-4 weeks, then pupate on leaves. 
One to 3 generations per year.
Control: Plant early season bush beans 
to avoid main beetle generations; plant 
soybeans as trap crops, destroy them when 
infested with larvae; handpick larvae and 
adults daily in small bean patches: cover 
plants with floating row cover until plants are 
large enough to withstand damage: attract 
native predators and parasites by leaving 
flowering weeds between rows or by inter- 
planting flowers and herbs; dig in crop 
residues as soon as plants are harvested; 
release spined soldier bugs [Podisus 
maculiventris) to control early generation; 
release parasitic wasps Pediobius foveolatus 
when weather warms; spray weekly with 
neem or pyrethrin.
Adult and eggs
Larva
A du It and lan-ae 
Adult and damage
Description: Adults: oval, yellowish 
brown, '/*' beetles with 16 black spots on 
wing covers. Larvae: fat, yellowish orange, 
W
grubs with long, branching spines. Eggs: 
yellow ovals laid on end on undersides of 
leaves. Found in most states east of the 
Mississippi River; also Texas, Arizona, Utah. 
Colorado, and Nebraska.
Da mage: Both larvae and adults skele­
tonize leaves of cowpeas, lima beans, snap 
beans, and soybeans. They feed from the 
undersides of leaves, leaving characteristic 
lacy damage; severely defoliated plants may 
be killed. Beetles are most abundant in 
weed less fields.
Life Cycle: Adults overwinter in leaf 
litter in nearby fields; in spring, females lay 
eggs on beans. Eggs hatch in 5-14 days.
Copyrighted material

306 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
M inute Pirate Bug Onus tristicolor
Adull
Description: Adults: quick-moving, black- 
and-white-patterned, */»" bugs. Nymphs: shiny, 
wingless, changing from yellow through 
orange to mahogany brown as they grow. 
Found throughout North America: sold 
commercially.
Beneficial Effect: Voracious predators
of thrips, spider mites, small caterpillars, 
leafhopper nymphs, other small insects, and 
insect eggs.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs in plant 
stems or leaves; eggs hatch in 3-5 days and 
nymphs feed on insects in flowers and 
undersides of leaves for 2-3 weeks. Adult 
females overwinter in crevices of bark, 
weeds, and plant residues. Two to 4 genera­
tions per year.
How to Attract: Plant pollen and nectar 
plants, especially goldenrod, daisies, yarrow, 
alfalfa, and stinging nettle; in greenhouses, 
release at the rate of 1 pirate bug per 1-5 
plants.
Mites, Gall (Family Eriophyidae)
Flower gal Li
Maple velvet gall
Description: Adults: nearly invisible, 
elongate, cylindrical, pale yellow or tan 
mites with 2 pairs of legs at the front end. 
Nymphs: similar to adults, but smaller. Found 
throughout North America.
Damage: Mites burrow from undersides 
into leaf tissue of pears, currants, and many 
ornamentals. Leaves react by forming raised 
blisters, puckers, or galls along leaf margins.
Some blisters, especially on maples, are 
bright red, others are yellow or brown.
Life Cycle: Numerous overlapping gen­
erations all season. Mites overwinter in 
crevices in bark, crawling onto new growth in 
the spring.
Control: Spray dormant oil or lime-sulfur 
on dormant plants.
Copyrighted m

MITES, RUST ■ 
307
Mites, Predatory (Family Phytoseiidae)
Adulis and prey
Description: Adults: minute, beige to 
reddish tan. fast-moving mites. Nymphs: 
similar to adults, but smaller. Found through­
out N orn America; several species sold 
commercially.
Beneficial Effect: These attack spider 
mites, especially European red mites and 
citrus red mites; some feed on pollen, thrips.
or other types of mites.
Life Cycle: Overwintering females emerge 
from crevices in bark or soil litter and lay 
eggs on leaves among prey: nymphs hatch in
3-4 days, molting several times until they 
reach the adult stage in 5-10 days. Numerous 
overlapping generations.
HOW to Attract: Avoid pesticide use; 
sustain native species by sprinkling pollen 
(especially from ice plants, cattails, or dan­
delions) on plants. For apples and strawberries, 
release Metaseiulus occidentalis to control 
European red mite and other spider mites; in 
greenhouses, release Phytoseiulus persimilis 
or other species to control spider mites; and 
release Amblyseius cucumeris to control 
small thrips on peppers and cucumbers.
Mites, Rust ( Family Eriophyidae )
Tomato russet mites 
Citrus rust mite damage
Description: Adults: nearly invisible, 
elongate, cylindrical, pale yellow or tan 
mites, with 2 pairs of legs at the head end. 
Nymphs similar to adults, but smaller.
Damage: Mites burrow from undersides 
into leaf tissue of apples, pears, tomatoes, 
and ornamental trees and shrubs. Infested 
leaves and fruit have russeted appearance.
Life Cycle: Mites overwinter at base of
buds or in cracks in bark, moving to develop­
ing flowers in spring. Numerous overlapping 
generations all season; populations usually 
decline in hot weather. By late August, most 
species move to overwintering sites.
Control: Spray dormant oil with lime- 
sulfur on dormant trees; spray foliage with 
sulfur fungicide.
Copyrighted

308 
■ 
INSEC : i IDENT1EICOTON < .1 11 >1
Mites, Spider (Family T ctranychidac)
Two-spot led .spider mite 
A dulls und webbing
Damage
Description: Adults: minute, 8-legged, 
'/so" mites with fine hairs on body, reddish, 
pale green or yellow: most, but not all, 
species spin fine webs. Nymphs: similar to 
adults, but smaller: early stages with b legs. 
Found throughout North America.
Damage: Adults and nymphs suck juice 
from cells on undersides of leaves of many 
food crops, ornamentals, and fruit trees. 
Plants are weakened, leaves may d r o p  and 
fruit may be stunted. Early damage appears 
as yellow specked areas, with or without 
webbing, on leaf undersides: later, leaves are 
bronzed or turn yellow or white with brown 
edges, webs may cover leaves and growing tips.
Life Cycle: Eggs or adults overwinter in
bark crevices or garden debris, emerging in 
early spring. Eggs hatch in 2-3 days, nymphs 
develop to adults in 7-10 days. Many overlap­
ping generations every season: reproduction 
continues all year in greenhouses.
Control: Spray fruit trees with dormant 
oil to kill overwintering eggs: in garden or 
greenhouse rinse plants with water and mist 
daily to suppress reproduction of mites; 
release predatory mites Aictasciulus occidcn- 
tcilis on fruit trees, Phyioseiulus persimilis or 
similar species on vegetables, strawberries, 
and flowers; spray insecticidal soap, pyrethrin, 
or neem; as a last resort, spray infested plants 
with avermectins.
Navel O rangew orm  Amyelois trunsitella
Larva 
Adult
Description: Adults: light gray moths 
with dark mottling and a dark border on 
hind wings (V«" wingspan). Larvae: reddish 
orange, brown-headed caterpillars with 2
crescent-shaped marks on the second segment 
behind the head. Found in southwest United 
States. Oklahoma, and Georgia.
Damage: Larvae are key pests in

NEMATODES ■ 
309
almonds, walnuts, citrus, figs, and other 
fruits. Larvae bore into cracks in nut husks 
or into damaged fruit, spinning webs inside 
and pupating.
Life Cycle: Adults lay eggs on mummi­
fied nuts, dropped nuts, or on the blossom 
end of injured fruit: larvae bore into nuts or 
fruit and spin webs inside; larvae feed and 
pupate inside the webs and then emerge the
next spring. One generation per year.
Control: Pick up dropped fruit or nuts 
and knock all mummified nuts out of trees in 
winter before adults emerge in spring; har­
vest nuts early to avoid damage; larvae in 
fallen nuts survive best on bare ground; 
therefore, grow cover crops under trees. On 
fruit, spray BTK to kill larvae before they 
bore into fruit.
Lesion nematode
root branching, leaf galls, lesions of dying 
tissue, and twisted, distorted leaves. Plants 
most commonly attacked at the roots include 
tomatoes, potatoes, peppers, lettuce, corn, 
and other vegetables; plants that sustain leaf 
and stem injury include chrysanthemums, 
onions, rye, and alfalfa.
Beneficial Effects: Some parasitic nem­
atode species are sold as biological controls 
for root weevils, crown and stem borers, corn
N em atodes
Root knot nematode
Damage
Damage
Description: Slender, translucent, unseg­
mented worms: most pest species are micro­
scopic plant parasites only about '/ jo " long; 
species i hat parasitize insects are larger— '/»" 
to several inches long; beneficial, soil-dwelling 
species hat break down organic matter are 
easily visible—about'/»" long. Found through­
out North America.
Damage: Pest nematodes cause root 
knots or galls, injured root tips, excessive
Copyrighted material

310 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
rootworms, and other lawn and garden pests. 
Beneficial nematodes also decompose organic 
material and are common in compost heaps.
Life Cycle: Most species have a mobile 
larval stage that moves through the soil or on 
a film of water to infect the host plant or 
insect; larvae molt several times to reach the 
adult stage; adults lay eggs in masses. Life 
cycle for many pest species takes 3-4 weeks.
Control: Nematodes move slowly in soil
and take several years to build up to damag­
ing numbers. Control pest nematodes by 
crop rotation with nonsusceptible crops, by 
planting a nematode-suppressing cover crop, 
such as marigolds, or by soil solarization. To 
solarize soil and destroy nematodes, cover 
moist soil with clear plastic mulch for the 
summer months; this procedure heats soil 
sufficiently to kill pest nematodes.
N orthern C orn Rootworm  Diabrotica longicom is
Larva and damage
Description: Adults: yellowish green, 
'/»" beetles, sometimes with brown heads and 
thoraxes. Larvae: slender, wrinkled, white, 
'//'grubs with light brown heads. Eggs: laid 
on soil near corn roots. Found in north- 
central United States.
Damage: Larvae severely damage corn 
roots; adults feed on pollen and corn silk, 
damaging cars and interfering with pollina­
tion; larvae also spread bacterial wilt.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs around 
corn roots in late summer and fall; eggs
hatch the following spring; larvae migrate to 
newly growing corn roots and feed until early 
summer, then pupate in a soilborne cell. 
Adults emerge in July and August. One 
generation per year in most areas.
Control: Since larvae cannot move far 
through soil, rotate crops to prevent pest 
buildup; encourage predatory ground and 
rove beetles with permanent borders; culti­
vate corn patches well after harvest and 
before seeding to kill eggs and larvae.
Copyrighted matei al

ONION MAGGOT ■ 
311
Larva
Adult
Description: Adulis: reddish brown moths 
with light and dark V pattern on their backs 
when wings are folded (•'/»" wingspan). Lar­
vae: pale green, black-headed caterpillars. 
Eggs: greenish, laid in overlapping masses on 
undersides of leaves. Found throughout North 
America.
Damage: Young larvae mine in leaves of 
apples, strawberries, roses, and other orna­
mentals in early spring. They later spin webs 
around branch tips and feed on enclosed 
buds, leaves, and developing fruit. Second 
generation larvae most damaging to fruit.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in lough 
silken cocoons on tree bark: resume feeding 
in spring, pupate, and emerge as adults in 
June. Eggs are laid on leaves: larvae mine in 
leaves, then move to branch lips. One gener­
ation per year: a second generation occurs in 
warmer regions.
Control: Spray with BTK or pyrethrin 
when larvae are young, before they spin 
webs; handpick and destroy webbed leaves 
and buds; on small trees, check for egg 
masses and destroy any you find.
of the United States as well as Canada.
Damage: Maggots burrow into develop­
ing onions or leeks, killing young plants and 
hollowing out or stunting older plants; rot 
diseases enter bulbs injured by maggot feed­
Adult 
Damage
Description: Adults: gray, bristly, hump­
backed, l/*" flies with large wings; about half 
the size of houseflies. Larvae: white, blunt- 
ended, '/*" maggots. Eggs: laid in soil near 
plants. Bound throughout the northern half
O nion Maggot Delia antiqua

312 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUDE
ing: 1 maggot can kill over a dozen seedlings 
during its development. This pest rarely 
infests onions in the South. In the North, 
infestations are worst in cool, wet weather, 
sometimes killing up to 80 percent of a 
spring crop.
Life Cycle: Flies overw inter as brown 
pupae, resembling grains of wheat, in soil or 
garden trash: adult flies emerge from pupae 
from mid-May to the end of June and lay 
eggs at the bases of onion or leek plants; 
eggs hatch in a week; maggots burrow into 
onions and feed 2-3 weeks, then pupate in 
soil nearby: adults emerge in 1-2 weeks.
Commonly 2 generations per growing sea­
son; a third generation may attack onions 
just before harvest and cause storage rot.
Control: Cover seedlings with floating 
row cover; sprinkle rows liberally with ground 
cayenne pepper, ginger, dill, or chili powder; 
plant cull onions around the borders and 
down the rows of seedling onions to act as a 
trap crop: pull and destroy cull trap crops 2 
weeks after they sprout: bury, burn, or 
destroy all unwanted onions at the end of 
harvest: plant onion sets late to avoid the 
first generation of flies.
O riental Fruit M oth G rapholitha m olesta
Larva and internal damage 
Adult
Description: Adults: small, dark gray 
moths with dark brown mottled forewings 
C/2" wingspan). Larvae: white to pinkish gray, 
‘//'caterpillars with browrn heads. Eggs: flat, 
white, laid on twigs or leaf undersides.
Found in eastern United States. Pacific 
Northwest, and Ontario.
Damage: In spring, young larvae bore 
into green tw igs of peach, almond, cherry, 
apple, pear, or other fruit trees causing twig 
wilting and dieback: second generation lar­
vae bore into developing fruit, leaving masses 
of gummy castings; later generations enter 
the stem end of maturing fruit leaving no
Twig damage
external signs of damage; perfect-looking 
fruit injured through stem entry will usually 
break down in storage.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in silken 
cocoons on bark or weeds or in soil around 
trees, pupating in early spring; adults emerge 
from early May to mid-June; females lay 
eggs, which hatch in 10-14 days: first genera­
tion larvae bore into tender stems and twigs, 
feed for 2-3 weeks, then pupate. Second 
generation adults appear in mid-July; second 
generation larvae bore into young fruit and 
don’t feed on twigs: a third generation of 
larvae arrive by the end of August in north-

PEACHTREE BORERS 
■ 
313
em  United States; these bore into the stem 
ends of mature fruits and feed on the pits. 
Three to 4 generations in the North, 6-7 in 
southern states.
Control: Where possible, plant early- 
bearing peach and apricot cultivars that are 
harvested before midsummer; to destroy
overwintering larvae, cultivate soil 4 inches 
deep around trees in early spring; attract 
native parasitic wasps and flies with flower­
ing cover crops planted around trees; disrupt 
mating with pheromone patches applied to 
lower limbs of trees (1 patch per 4 trees); 
spray superior oil to kill eggs and larvae.
B orers Synanthedon exitiosa  and S. pictipes
Lana 
Adult female
Description: Adults: blue-black, I 1//' 
moths with yellow or orange bands across 
the body and narrow translucent wings; 
adults resemble wasps, and, unlike most 
moths, are active during the day. Larvae: 
white caterpillars with dark brown heads; 
'/»"-l ” long, depending on age. Found through­
out North America.
Damage: Larvae bore beneath bark of 
peach trees at the base as well as into main 
roots near the surface. Also may attack 
plum, prune, cherry, apricot, and nectarine 
trees. Trees are often girdled. Burrow entrance 
holes exude gum mixed with sawdustlike 
material Young or weak trees may be 
seriously damaged or killed; older trees are 
less affec ted.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in tree 
trunk burrows; in the spring they spin brown 
silken cocoons at the surface of the burrow 
or in soil: cocoons may be covered with dirt 
and gum from the tree; first adult moths
emerge in July, and adult emergence contin­
ues into early fall; in late summer females 
begin laying eggs on tree trunks or in cracks 
in soil within a few inches of trunks; eggs 
hatch in 10 days, and new larvae burrow into 
tree trunks to feed and overwinter until next 
year. One generation per year; some with
2-year life cycle.
Control: Since adult borer moths are 
attracted to injured or diseased trees, main­
tain vigorous trees and avoid mechanical 
injury to trunks; beginning in late summer 
and into fall, inspect tree trunks from a foot 
or so above ground level to a few inches 
below ground level, digging away soil to 
expose the trunk area below the ground 
surface; kill borers in exposed burrows by 
inserting a fine, flexible wire: in the fall and 
spring cultivate soil around the base of the 
trunk to expose and destroy larvae and 
pupae; attract native parasitic wasps and 
predators.

314 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION («l IDE
Pear Psylla C acopsylla pyricola
Nymph 
Adult
Description: Adults: red to green. '/iu" 
long insects, resembling tiny cicadas with 
wings folded rooflike over the back. Nymphs: 
oval, green to brown, wingless, V«o" insects. 
Found in eastern United States and Canada. 
Pacific Northwest, and California.
Damage: A major pest of pears and 
quinces, psyllas suck plant juices, causing 
leaves to yellow from the toxic saliva: honey­
dew secretions support growth of sooty
Pear Sawfly Caliroa cenisi
Larva 
Adult
Description: Adults: shiny, black-and- 
yellow. Vi" insects, resembling houseflies. 
Larvae: young resemble green-black. Vi" 
slugs: older larvae arc yellow and segmented. 
Found throughout North America.
Damage: Larvae skeletonize upper leaf 
surfaces of pears, cherries, plums, and 
cotoneasters. leaving scorched areas. Young 
trees may be defoliated and eventually killed. 
Second generation larvae cause the most
Damage
mold. Feeding spreads pear decline virus.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults emerge 
in spring from bark and leaf litter to lay eggs 
on fruit spurs and buds. Nymphs spend early 
stages protected by honeydew: later stages 
are more active. Three to 5 generations 
per year.
Control: Spray superior oil in the spring; 
plant cover crops to attract native predatory 
insects: spray insecticidal soap.
Damage
damage. Related species on roses.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in cocoons 
in soil and pupate in spring; adults emerge in 
late May; eggs hatch in a week; larvae feed
3-4 weeks, then pupate in soil. Second 
generation adults appear in late July, with 
larvae hatching in mid-August.
Control: Spray trees with strong streams 
of water to remove larvae; spray serious 
infestations with pyrethrin.
Copyrighted m

PLUM CURCULJO 
■ 
315
Picklew orm  Dicqyhania nitidalis
Larva and damage 
Adult
Description: Adults: moths with brown- 
banded wing edges (I1/ / ' wingspan) and hair 
tufts on the tip of the abdomen. Larvae: pale 
green caterpillars with black spots when 
young. Found mostly in southeastern United 
States.
Damage: Larvae chew blossoms and 
vines and bore into fruit of cucurbit plants, 
especially cucumbers, cantaloupes, and squash. 
A serious pest of summer squash.
Life Cycle: Pupae overwinter in weeds
or rolled leaves of cucurbits: adults emerge 
in spring and lay eggs on vines; eggs hatch in 
a few days; larvae feed for 2 weeks, then 
pupate in cocoons inside rolled leaves. Up to 
5 generations per year.
Control: Plant early maturing cultivars; 
plant and destroy a summer squash trap crop 
to protect cucumber and melon; destroy or 
till under all residues from cucurbit vines 
right after harvest.
Plum  Curculio C onotrachelus nenuphar
Adult
Adults
Description: Adults: dark, brownish gray, 
V ” beetles with warty, hard wing covers, 
prominent snout, and white hairs on body. 
Larvae: plump, white. Vs"grubs with brown 
heads. Eggs: round, white, laid individually 
under a crescent-shaped cut in the fruit skin. 
Found in eastern North America.
Damage: A major plum and apple pest 
in many areas, adult curculios feed on petals, 
buds, and young fruit; females deposit a 
single egg just under fruit skin, leaving a 
crescent-shaped scar at each egg-laying site; 
newly hatched larvae feed inside the fruit, 
causing it to drop, rot, or develop deformed
Copyrighted

316 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
growth. Other susceptible fruits include 
peaches, cherries, and apricots.
Life Cycle: Adult beetles overwinter 
under fallen leaves, stones, logs, or other 
garden debris, flying to trees just as blossoms 
open: adults feed and lay eggs, which hatch 
in 5-10 days: larvae feed in fruit 2-3 weeks; 
when fruit drops, they exit and pupate in the 
soil. Second generation adults emerge in late 
July to late October, feed on ripe or fallen 
fruit until fall, then move to shelter to 
hibernate. Up to 2 generations per year.
Control: Knock beetles out of trees
onto a dropcloth by sharply tapping branches 
with a padded stick ; gather and destroy 
beetles; for this control to be effective, you 
must do it twice a day throughout the 
growing season. Every other day pick up and 
destroy all fallen fruit, especially early drops; 
keep chickens around fruit trees to feed on 
dropped fruit. In areas where severe infesta­
tions occur, check developing fruit for egg 
scars twice a week; when first fruit scars 
appear, apply pyrethrin and repeat in 7-10 
days. Do not spray before petals drop—it 
may kill beneficial pollinators.
Larva 
Adult
Description: Adults: mottled gray moths 
with narrow, fringed wings C/2" wingspan). 
Larvae: slender, pinkish white. V2" borers 
with dark heads. Found mostly in southern 
United States.
Damage: Early summer larvae feed in 
leaves and stems of potatoes, tomatoes, and 
eggplants; later-generation larvae feed inside 
potato tubers, allowing rot to enter.
Life Cycle: Larvae or pupae overwinter 
in soil or potato culls left outdoors; in spring
adults emerge and lay eggs on plants; eggs 
hatch in a few days: larvae feed 2-3 weeks, 
then pupate for a week; up to 6 generations 
per year in warm regions.
Control; Plant potatoes early: harvest 
early; use heavy mulch to prevent cracked, 
dry soil, which exposes potato tubers to 
attack; at harvest, destroy cull potatoes and 
infested vines before nightfall; adult moths 
lay eggs on culls left out overnight.
Potato Tuberworm  P hthorim aea operculella
Copyrighted mat< rial

ROSE CHAFER 
■ 
317
Praying M antid M antis religiosa
Adult with egg case 
Adult
Description: Adults: large, elongated, 
green or brown insects with prominent eyes; 
up to 4" long. Nymphs: similar to adults, but 
smaller and without wings. Eggs: laid in a 
grayish frothy case of 50-400 eggs glued to 
stems or twigs. Found in southern and 
eastern United States, north into Ontario.
Beneficial Effect: Mantids catch and 
devour both pests and beneficial species. 
They ea^ virtually any insects they catch.
including each other.
Life Cycle: Eggs are glued in a gray, 
frothy, sticky mass to plants where they 
harden and remain for the winter: adults 
hatch in the spring; 1 generation per year.
How to Attract: To protect native species, 
don’t release purchased mantids. and avoid 
pesticides; provide sites for overwintering 
eggs by keeping permanent plantings around 
the garden.
Rose Chafer M acrodactylus subspinosus
Adult
Description: Adults: reddish brown, 'A" 
beetles with black undersides and wing 
covers cloaked in thick, yellowish hairs. 
Larvae: small white grubs. Found throughout 
North America.
Damage: Larvae feed on roots of grass 
and weeds; adults chew on the flowers, 
leaves, and fruit of grapes, roses, tree fruits, 
brambles, strawberries, peonies, irises, dahlias, 
hollyhocks, and vegetables. Serious damage 
only with heavy infestation.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in soil, 
pupate in spring, and emerge as adults in late 
May to early June; adults lay eggs in soil until 
early July; eggs hatch in about 2 weeks; 
grubs feed on roots until fall.
Control: Control is usually not necessary. 
Flandpick if needed; for severe infestations, 
spray with pyrethrin.
Copyrighted material

318 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
R oundheaded A ppletree B orer Saperda Candida
Roundheaded appletree 
borer larx-a (bottom) and 
flat headed appletree borer 
larva I top)
Description: Adults: yellow or reddish 
brown, V/' beetles with white stripes. Larvae 
creamy white, dark-headed grubs. Found in 
eastern Canada and United States west to 
Nevada.
Damage: Larvae bore into trunks of 
apple trees near ground level, girdling the 
tree or penetrating into heartwood. Other 
hosts include pears, plums, cherries, crab 
apples, mountain ashes, and hawthorns.
Life Cycle: Adults emerge in June and 
lay eggs in bark just above soil line: larvae 
burrow into sapwood, overwinter in soil, and 
tunnel into heartwood the second year. In 
the third spring, larvae pupate in tree tunnels 
and emerge as adults several weeks later. 
Two- to 4-year life cycle.
Control: Remove nearby wild host trees; 
impale larvae in holes with flexible wire; 
inject parasitic nematodes in borer holes.
Rove Beedes ( Family Staphylinidae)
Adult
Description: Adults: brown or black, 
slender, Vio'-l" long beetles with stubby 
wings covering only part of the body. Larvae: 
resembling adults, but wingless. Over 3,100 
species native to North America.
Beneficial Effect: Valuable for control­
ling aphids, springtails, mites, nematodes, 
flies, and cabbage maggots. Also help decom­
pose organic matter.
Life Cycle: Most species overwinter as 
adults, becoming active in the spring and 
laying eggs in the soil; larvae molt 3 times as 
they feed, then pupate in soil.
How to Attract: Maintain permanent 
beds and plantings in garden to protect 
overwintering adults; interplant with cover 
crops or mulch planting beds; make stone or 
plank walks in garden to provide shelter.
Copyrighted material

SAWFLIES. LEAFMINER 
■ 
319
European pine sawflies 
European pine sawfly
lar\-ae and damage
Description: Adults: stout, '/("-‘A" insects 
with membranous wings. Larvae: similar to 
caterpillars, gray with light stripes or yellow 
with black dots. Found in eastern United 
States and Canada.
Damage: Larvae strip needles from the 
upper branches of pines, spruces, and 
hemlocks. Repeated infestations kill trees.
Life Cycle: Eggs overwinter in branch 
slits, hatch into needle-devouring larvae in
Redheaded pine sawfly 
larvae and damage
early spring, then pupate in ground litter: 
adults emerge in fall and lay eggs. Some 
species lay eggs in spring and overwinter in 
cocoons. One generation per year.
Control: Shrews, viral diseases, predators, 
and parasites generally suppress populations. 
Spread dropcloths under trees to collect, and 
destroy larvae as they drop to the ground. 
Apply superior oil to trees. (Note: Oil on 
blue spruce damages foliage.)
Sawflies, C onifer Neodiprion spp.
Sawflies, Leafm iner Fenusa spp.
Birch leafminer adult
Description: Adults: black, stout-bodied, 
'/»" insects with transparent wings. Larvae: 
flattened, white, legless maggots with brown 
heads. Found in northern and eastern United 
States, west to Great Lakes states. Related 
species in Canada.
Damage: Larvae mine leaves of elm, 
birch, or alder, feeding between upper and 
lower leaf surfaces and leaving brownish,
wrinkled blisters in leaves: damaged trees 
may be attacked by borers and other pests.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in cocoons 
in the soil, pupating in the spring: adults 
emerge in mid-May and lay eggs in leaves; 
larvae feed in leaves until ready to pupate. 
Up to 4 generations per year.
Control: Maintain healthy, vigorous 
trees.

320 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION (il 11)1.
Scales, A rm ored (Fam ily Coccidae)
I
Oy.\lcr*hcll acute
Sun Jt/.u- Mu/t-
Description: Adults: circular or oval, 
hard bumps less than '/io" in diameter and 
sometimes bearing a dimple in the center. 
Colors vary, including gray, yellow, white, 
and reddish or purplish brown. All secrete an 
armor of wax in an oyster-shell or circular 
pattern. Nymphs: early stages are mobile 
crawlers; later stages are legless and sedentary-. 
Most species are found in southern United 
States, some in northern United States and 
southern Canada.
Damage: Scales weaken plants by suck­
ing plant juices. In the South they attack 
citrus, roses, palms, and tropical ornamen­
tals; northern species attack fruit trees, 
shade trees, grapes, currants, raspberries, 
and shrubs. Scales also cause injury by 
injecting toxic saliva into plant tissues. Some 
species secrete honeydew, which attracts 
ants and encourages the growth of sooty
Californiii red scale
Oleander scale
mold, a fungus that feeds on the honeydew. 
Severe infestations may kill trees.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs or give 
birth to live nymphs; these wander for a few 
hours or days, then settle and molt to an 
immobile adult form, a process that takes a 
month or more. Most scales overwinter as 
nymphs or eggs hidden in tree bark. One to 2 
generations in northern regions; in southern 
regions, up to 6 generations per year.
Control: Difficult to control with pesti­
cides because they are protected by a waxy 
covering. Dormant oil sprays smother over­
wintering eggs and provide good control; 
superior oil sprays kill eggs and nymphs. 
Release predatory beetles Chilocorus nigritus 
or Lindorus lophanthae. Release parasitic 
wasps Aphytis melinus against California red 
scale and oleander scale.
Copyrighted m

SCALES. SOFT ■ 
321
Black scale
Scales, Soft ( Family Coccidae)
Sooty mold due to scale
Brown soft scale
Hemispherical scale
one spot. Females molt to a legless, immo­
bile form. Males molt to tiny, flylike insects. 
One or 2 generations per year outdoors; up 
to 6 generations on indoor plants.
Control: Prune and dispose of infested 
branches and twigs. Attract native predatory 
beetles, such as soldier beetles and lady 
beetles as well as parasitic wasps. Remove 
scales from twigs with a soft brush or your 
fingernail, or from leaves with a soft cloth 
and soapy water: rinse well. Release preda­
tory beetles Chilocorus nigritus or Lindorus 
lophanthae. Release parasitic wasp Metaphycus 
helvolus to control soft brown scale. Spray 
dormant oil on fruit and ornamental trees. 
Spray superior oil (not on citrus after July). 
As a last resort, spray with pyrethrin.
Cottony cushion scale 
Cottony maple scale
Description: Adults: females are oval or 
round, soft, legless bumps, Vio'-'/s" in diame­
ter and without wings or appendages; males 
are minute, yellow-winged insects. Larvae: 
mobile crawlers resembling tiny mealybugs. 
Found throughout North America.
Damage: All stages suck plant sap, 
weakening plants, especially citrus, fruit 
trees, ornamental shrubs, trees, and house­
plants. n severe infestations, leaves yellow 
and drop and the plant dies. Most scales 
secrete large quantities of honeydew onto 
foliage .md fruit. Sooty mold, a black fungus, 
feeds on the honeydew.
Life Cycle: Females of some species lay 
as many 2.000 eggs: others give birth to 
several nymphs per day. Mobile nymphs 
move around for a short time, then settle at

322 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
Shothole B orer Scolytus r u g u lo s u s
Larvae 
Damage
Description: Adults: brown or black, 
•/io" beetles with red-tipped wing covers. 
Larvae: white grubs with reddish brown 
heads. Found throughout North America.
Damage: Adults and larvae bore and 
tunnel under the bark of peach, plum, 
cherry, apple, and pear; unhealthy trees are 
most often attacked.
Life Cycle: Adults bore through bark
a n d  dep o sit eggs in galleries. Resulting
Damage
larvae bore at right angles to parent gallery 
and pupate under the bark. Emerging adults 
bore new escape holes through bark. Two to 
3 generations per year.
Control: Maintain healthy trees; destroy 
infested branches or trees in winter when 
larvae are still in wood; destroy borers by 
inserting a flexible wire into burrows; protect 
young trunks with whitewash or latex paint 
diluted with an equal amount of water.
Slugs/Snails
Brown garden snail 
Bro wn garden snails
Description: Adults: soft-bodied, gray, 
tan, green, black, yellow, or spotted, wormlike 
animals that are members of the same 
zoological group as clams, mussels, and 
scallops. Slugs have no shells, while snails 
have coiled shells. Measuring 
both
slugs and snails leave characteristic trails of 
mucus wherever they crawl. Eggs: clear, 
oval or round, laid in jellylike masses under
stones or debris. Garden slugs and snails 
occur throughout North America.
Damage: Both slugs and snails rasp 
large holes in foliage, stems, and bulbs. They 
feast on any tender plant or shrub and may 
demolish seedlings. Most damaging in wet 
years or regions.
Life Cycle: Adults lay eggs in moist soil 
or under rocks. Eggs hatch in 2-4 weeks and

SOUTHWESTERN CORN BORER 
■ 
323
young grow 5 months to 2 years before 
reaching maturity.
Control: Wrap copper strips around 
trunks of trees or shrubs, or use copper 
flashing as edging for garden beds. Trap 
under flowerpots or boards. Attract 
with pieces of raw potato or cabbage leaves 
set out in the garden; collect and destroy
every morning. Trap in shallow pans of beer 
buried with the container lip flush to soil 
surface. To encourage predatory beetles, 
maintain permanent walkways of clover, sod, 
or stone mulch. Protect seedlings with wide 
bands of cinders, wood ashes, or diatoma- 
ceous earth, renewed frequently.
Soldier Beedes (Family Cantharidae)
Beneficial Effect: Both larvae and adults 
prey on cucumber beetles, com  rootworms, 
aphids, grasshopper eggs, caterpillars, and 
beetle larvae.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs in soil; 
newly hatched larvae remain inactive for a 
short period before developing; larvae over­
winter in soil and pupate in the spring. Up to 
2 generations per year.
How to Attract: To attract adult soldier 
beetles, plant goldenrod, milkweed, hydran­
geas, or catnip. To protect pupating beetles, 
maintain some permanent plantings where 
soil is not disturbed.
Downy leatherwinged 
soldier beetle
Description: Adults: elongated, slender, 
nearly flat. xti'-'hh beetles, often with downy, 
leather) wing covers. Larvae: flattened, elon­
gated, covered with hairs, and usually dark- 
colored Found throughout North America.
Southw estern C orn B orer D iatraea grandiosella
Larva and damage 
Adult
Description: Adults: pale beige, lightly 
in summer. Found throughout the South,
marked moths (1V*" wingspan); males darker. 
Damage: Larvae bore into leaf whorls,
Larvae: white with brown heads, spotted 
stalks, and roots of corn, sorghum, and some
Copyrighted

324 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
grasses, causing stem breakage.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in plant 
roots and pupate in early June; moths 
emerge a week later and lay eggs; larvae 
bore into leaf whorls and stalks, then pupate
and emerge in August. Second generation 
larvae bore into stalks, then roots.
Control: Plant com early; plant resistant 
cultivars; cut stalks at soil level and remove 
right after harvest; cultivate deeply in fall.
Sow bugs/Pillbugs
Adulis
A  du II
Description: Adults: slate gray or brown. 
'/■♦"-Ya"crustaceans with jointed armor and 7 
pairs of tiny legs; some curl up in a ball when 
disturbed. They are not insects, but are 
related to crayfish. Nymphs: same as adults, 
but smaller, found throughout North America.
Damage: Usually none to established 
plants; however, in high numbers damage to 
seedlings can be severe. Feed on decaying
Adulis
organic material and young seedlings.
Life Cycle: Eggs are laid in damp loca­
tions; young are similar to adults.
Control: Drain wet areas; sprinkle dia- 
tomaceous earth around foundations where 
bugs congregate; trap under stones or boards, 
then destroy; make paper traps painted with 
a sticky coating, such as Tanglefoot, then 
folded tentlike, with sticky side down.
Spined Soldier Bug Podisus m aculiventris
Adult and prey
Description: Adults: shield-shaped, black- 
speckled, x/i" bugs with sharp points on 
shoulders. Nymphs: similar to adults, but 
wingless. Native to North America.
Beneficial Effect: Important native pred­
ators attack caterpillars and grubs, including 
tent caterpillars, fall armyworms, sawfly 
larvae, and Mexican bean beetle larvae.
Life Cycle: Overwintering adults emerge 
in spring; females lay eggs on leaves; nymphs 
drink water or plant juices for a short period, 
then become predators; nymphs develop to 
adults in 6-8 weeks: adults live 5-8 weeks. 
One to 2 generations per year.
HOW to Attract: Maintain permanent 
beds of perennials to provide shelter.

Spitdebug/Froghopper Philaenus spumariiis
SPRUCE BIJDWORM 
■ 
325
Nymph 
Nymph in spittle mass
Description: Adults: oval, frog-faced, 
VV-Va" insects; tan, brown, or black. Nymphs: 
yellow to yellowish green, similar to adults, 
but wingless: inside a foamy mass of “spittle.” 
Eggs: white to beige, laid in rows. Found 
throughout North America.
Damage: Adults and nymphs suck plant 
juices of strawberries, legumes, forage crops, 
and nursery plants, causing stunted, dwarfed, 
weakened plants with reduced yields. Adults
Meadow spittlehug nymph 
and spittle mass
migrate from hayfields to nearby crops when 
hay is cut.
Life Cycle: Overwintering eggs hatch in 
mid-April; nymphs develop in spittle masses 
for 6-7 weeks. Adults feed over the summer, 
laying eggs in field stubble by fall.
Control: Not usually a serious problem 
in a home garden; if many nymphs apparent 
in summer, then turn in stubble of suscep­
tible crops in the fall to kill eggs.
Adult and larva
Spruce Budworm  C horistoneura fu m ifem n ci
Damage: Larvae mine in needles, buds, 
cones, or twigs of balsam fir. spruce, Doug­
las fir, hemlock, larch, and pine. One of the 
most damaging forest pests in North Amer­
ica; also damaging in nurseries and orna­
mental trees. Budworms are the most serious 
conifer pests in North America, destroying 
billions of board feet of fir and spruce each
Damage
Description: Adults: grayish brown moths 
(V /-11 fi"wingspan); hind wings dark brown 
with white fringe. Larvae: dark brown cater­
pillars with lighter sides, dark spines, and 2 
rows of white dots along their backs. Found 
throughout north-central and eastern United 
States; in Canada to the Yukon; related 
species in western North America.
Copyrighted material

326 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
year. After 3-5 years of heavy infestation, 
entire stands of conifers may be killed; 
surviving trees are weakened and susceptible 
to bark beetles.
Life Cycle: Moths lay eggs from late 
June to early August; eggs hatch in 8-12 
days. Young larvae disperse throughout tree, 
then spin cocoons and hibernate. The fol­
lowing spring larvae emerge and mine in old 
needles, then in young buds. As new growth 
expands, they spin webs around tips of twigs 
and feed inside, pupating by late June.
Anasa tristis
Adull
Description: Adults: brownish black, 
flat-backed, x/i" bugs covered with fine, dark 
hairs. They give off an unpleasant smell in 
defense. Nymphs: whitish green or gray 
young, similar in shape to adults, with darker 
thorax and abdomen as they mature; usually 
covered with a grainy white powder. Eggs: 
shiny yellow to brown ellipses, in groups on 
underside of leaves. Found throughout North 
America.
Adults emerge in 10 days. One generation 
per year.
Control: Spray BTK as soon as tiny 
larvae appear in late summer and again in 
early spring when they resume feeding; 
avoid using balsam fir in ornamental plantings. 
Since outbreaks of this pest are most com­
mon in overmature stands of spruce and 
balsam firs, avoid planting these trees as 
ornamental specimens if you live in an area 
where spruce and fir grow in great abundance.
Damage: Both adults and nymphs suck 
plant juices of all cucurbit crops, especially 
squash or pumpkins, causing leaves and 
shoots to blacken and die back; attacked 
plants fail to produce fruit. Winter squash 
are most severely affected.
Life Cycle: Unmated adult insects over­
winter under garden litter, vines, or boards 
to emerge, mate, and lay eggs in spring; 
nymphs take all summer to develop, molting 
5 times before maturity.
Control: Maintain vigorous plant growth; 
handpick all stages of squash bugs from 
undersides of leaves; support vines off the 
ground on trellises; attract native parasitic 
flies with pollen and nectar plants; cover 
plants with floating row cover (you’ll need to 
hand-pollinate flowers).
Squash Bug
Copyrighted material

S UNK BI GS 
■ 
327
Damage
eggs on stems and leaf stalks near the base of 
the plant. Newly hatched larvae bore into 
vine stems, causing sudden wilting and death 
of stems. Larvae feed for up to 6 weeks, then 
pupate in the soil.
Control: Early in the growing season, 
cover vines with floating row cover; uncover 
later for pollinators or hand-pollinate; spray 
base of plants with pyrethrin repeatedly to 
kill young larvae before they enter vines; to 
save attacked vines, slit infested stems and 
remove borers, and heap soil over vines to 
induce rooting.
B orer M elittia ciicurbitae
Description: Adults: narrow-winged, 
olive-brown, l '- l 1/*"moths, with fringed 
hind le^-s. clear hind wings, and red abdo­
mens with black rings. Larvae: white with 
brown heads. Found throughout the United 
States and Canada east of the Rocky Moun­
tains and south to Mexico.
Damage: Larvae bore into vines of 
squash, pumpkins, cucumbers, melons, and 
gourds. They chew the inner tissue near the 
base, causing vines to wilt suddenly; girdled 
vines rot and die.
Life Cycle: Larvae or pupae overwinter 
in the soil. Adults emerge in spring and lay
Larva and damage
Adult
B u g S  (Family Pentatomidae)
Bn-wn Mink bug 
Harlequin bug eggs
Description: Adults: shield-shaped, green, 
tan, brown, or gray, xh" bugs; most species 
smooth, but a few spiny or rough-textured. 
Nymphs: oval-shaped, wingless; similar to 
adults. Eggs: barrel-shaped, often with a
Harlequin bug
fringe of spines at one end. laid in clusters. 
Found throughout North America.
Damage: Adults and nymphs suck plant 
sap from leaves, flowers, buds, fruit, and 
seeds of cabbage family crops, squash.

328 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
beans, peas, corn, tomatoes, and peaches. 
Feeding punctures in fruit cause scarring and 
dimpling known as cat-facing. The harlequin 
bug, a species with bright red and black 
markings, is the most important pest of 
cabbage family crops in the South.
Life Cycle: Adults overwinter in weeds 
in waste areas: females lay 300-500 eggs each
when weather warms: eggs hatch in a week, 
and nymphs develop to adults in about 5 
weeks. Two or more generations per year.
Control: Control weeds in susceptible 
crops: remove or mow weedy areas adjacent 
to garden beds; attract native parasitic wasps 
and flies by planting small-flowered plants. 
As a last resort, dust with pyrethrin.
Straw berry Root Weevil O tiorhynchus ovatus
Description: Adults: black, shiny, hard- 
shelled, flightless, 'A" weevils. Larvae: white, 
legless, brown-headed grubs. Found through­
out North America.
Damage: Larvae bore into crowns and 
roots of strawberries and into roots of
raspberries, grapes, apples, peaches, arbor­
vitae, and pine and spruce seedlings. Adults 
feed on leaves, needles, and fruits, clipping 
half-circles from edges of leaves.
Life Cycle: Larvae overwinter in soil 
and pupate in spring; a few adults overwinter 
in debris; in spring newly emerged adults 
feed for 2-3 weeks, then lay eggs throughout 
the summer; new larvae burrow into soil to 
feed on roots, then move deeper into soil 
until spring.
Control: Cover plants with floating row 
cover; apply insect parasitic nematodes to 
soil to control larvae; spray pyrethrin to kill 
leaf-feeding adults.
Tachinid Flies ( Family Tachinidae)
Adult
Description: Adults: robust, gray, brown, 
or black, Vj'-'/i" insects resembling overgrown, 
bristly houseflies; some with mottled bodies
but without bright colors. Larvae: maggots 
that feed inside host insects. Found through­
out North America.
Beneficial Effect: Excellent predators of 
many caterpillar pests, including cutworms, 
armyworms. tent caterpillars, cabbage loopers, 
and gypsy moth larvae; some also attack 
sawflies, squash bugs, and stink bugs.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs on newly 
hatched larvae or on leaves on which cater­
pillars are feeding; caterpillars then ingest 
eggs and larvae hatch inside the host; larvae
Adult

TARNISHED PLANT BUG 
■ 
329
feed and devour the host from within; in 
some cases females place live young on a 
caterpillar’s skin and the maggots burrow 
into the host. As maggots develop inside, 
they kill the host, then pupate inside or in 
soil nearby. Up to 2 generations per year.
How to Attract: Adult flies feed on the 
nectar of flowers of dill, parsley, sweet clover, 
and other herbs, so allow weeds to flower 
throughout the garden; don’t destroy cater­
pillars with white eggs stuck to their backs— 
these will develop into more tachinid flies.
Tarnished Plant Bug Lygus lineolaris
I
Tarnish* d plant hug nymph
Tarnished plant hug
Damage
Description: Adults: oval, light green to 
brown, m ottled,'/»" bugs; each forewing with 
a black-tipped yellow triangle. Nymphs: 
vellow-green. wingless: similar to adults. 
Several other plant bug species (Family 
Miridae) also damage garden plants. Found 
throughout North America.
Damage: Adults and nymphs suck plant 
juices of most flowers, fruits, and vegetables, 
causing shoot and fruit distortion, bud drop, 
wilting, stunting, and dieback.
Four-lined plant bug
Lite Cycle: Adults overwinter under 
bark or leaf litter, emerge in early spring to 
lay eggs in leaf tissue; eggs hatch in 10 days; 
nymphs feed 3-4 weeks, then molt to adult. 
Up to 5 generations per year.
Control: Cover plants with floating row 
cover; attract native predators (bigeyed bugs, 
damsel bugs, pirate bugs) with groundcovers 
and pollen plants; try releases of minute 
pirate bugs; spray seriously infested plants 
with pyrethrin as a last resort.
Copyrighted mate

330 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION Cit IDE
Tent C aterpillars M alcicosom a spp.
Eastern tent 
Eastern lent 
Eastern tent
caterpillar egg mass 
caterpillar 
caterpillar
Tent 
Eastern tent caterpillar
and tent
Description: Adults: yellowish tan to 
brown moths with 2 narrow, diagonal stripes 
across wings ( 1 1  x/i" wingspan). Larvae: 
black, hairy. 2n-2x/i” caterpillars with a white 
stripe or rows of dots along the back and 
irregular, brownish blue or red marks along 
sides: most spin large “tents’ of silk webbing 
in branch crotches of trees. Eggs: laid on 
twigs in masses, covered with hardened 
foamy layer. Eggs resemble a dark, shiny belt 
encircling a twig. Found throughout North 
America.
Damage: Larvae feed on leaves of most 
deciduous trees and shrubs, especially apples, 
aspens, and wild cherries. Trees may be fully 
defoliated in years of high caterpillar popu­
lations. Trees usually leaf out again later 
in the summer but growth may be stunted 
for several years.
Life Cycle: Moths lay eggs on twigs in 
midsummer: eggs overwinter and hatch in
early spring: caterpillars move to nearest 
branch crotch and spin a silk tent for 
protection during rain or at night, and leave 
it to feed during the day. After feeding 5-8 
weeks, they pupate in white cocoons attached 
to tree trunks or leaf litter; adult moths 
emerge in 10 days. One generation per year.
Control: Prune infested branches and 
burn them, or remove tents filled with 
caterpillars from branches by winding them 
onto a broomstick with nails projecting from 
it; in winter, remove egg masses from bare 
branches: attract native parasitic flies and 
wasps by growing small-flowered herbs, such 
as catnip, and wildflowers, such as Queen 
Anne’s lace. Do noi destroy wandering cater­
pillars with white eggs or cocoons attached 
to their backs; they are hosts for native 
parasites. Spray BTK weekly while larvae are 
small; try releases of spined soldier bugs.
Copyrighted material
I
*

THRIPS ■ 
331
T hrips ( Family Thripidae)
• 
'***■* 
•  *
- y
j p  • 
p  
* 
£  *
Greenhouse thrips
Western flower thrips
Damage
Damage
Description: Adults: slender, '/ j o '- '/ b "  
long insects: colors range from yellowish to 
brown or black: these fast-moving insects 
leap or fly away on narrow, fringed wings 
when disturbed: individual insects difficult 
to see without a magnifying glass. Nymphs: 
similar to small adults; light green or yellow, 
some with red eyes. Found throughout North 
America.
Damage: Adults and nymphs suck con­
tents of plant cells from a variety of garden 
plants, flowers, fruits, and shade trees. Their 
feeding leaves silvery speckling or streaks on 
leaves; severe infestations stunt plants and 
damage flowers and developing fruit: some 
species spread tomato spotted wilt virus.
Life Cycle: Adults overwinter in sod,
plant debris, or cracks in bark, becoming 
active in early spring. Eggs are laid in plant 
tissue and hatch in 3-5 days; nymphs feed for
1-3 weeks, then rest in soil or on leaves until 
they molt to adult form in 1-2 weeks. Up to 
15 generations per year outdoors; may breed 
continuously in greenhouses.
Control: Spray dormant oil on fruit 
trees; encourage native predators, such as 
pirate bugs, lacewings, and lady beetles; for 
onion or western flower thrips, release the 
predatory mite Amblyseius cucumeris or 
minute pirate bugs (Orius tristicolor); hang 
blue or yellow sticky traps to catch adults; 
spray insecticidal soap, pyrethrin, or neem; 
as a last resort, dust undersides of leaves with 
diatomaceous earth.
Copyrighted material

332 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GLIDE
Tiger Beetles (Family Cicindelidae)
Six-spotted tiger beetle
Description: Adults: long-legged. Vi"-*/*" 
beetles with bright colors and patterns on 
their bodies; often attracted to lights at 
night. Larvae: segmented, S-shaped larvae, 
each with a pronounced hump covered with
strong hooks on the fifth segment. Found 
throughout North America.
Beneficial Effect: Both adults and lar­
vae feed on a variety of insects; generally 
beneficial for controlling pests.
Life Cycle: Females lay single eggs in 
soil burrows; larvae prey on insects that fall 
into burrows; larvae develop for several years 
before adulthood. One generation takes
2-3 years.
How to Attract: Maintain permanent 
plantings as refuges; do not use insect 
light traps.
Tomato H ornw orm  M anduca quinquem aculata
Tobacco hornworm 
Tomato homworm adult
Description: Adults: large, gray moths 
(4"-5" wingspan). Larvae: green caterpillars 
up to 4 V2" long with a black horn on tail, 8 
diagonal white marks along the sides. The 
tobacco hornworm (Manduca sexta), a related 
species, has a red horn and 7 white marks on 
the sides. Found throughout North America.
Damage: Larvae of both species con­
sume leaves, stems, and fruit of nightshade
j
family plants. Feeding can kill young plants.
Life Cycle: In June and July, moths 
emerge from soilborne pupae; adults lay eggs 
on undersides of leaves; eggs hatch in a 
week; larvae feed for a month, then pupate 
in soil until the following summer.
Control: Handpick caterpillars from 
foliage; attract native parasitic wasps; spray 
BTK while caterpillars are still small.
Copyrighted materjal 
1

VINEGAR FLY/FRUIT FLY 
■ 
333
Western ussock moth larva 
Western tussock moth
winged adult male 
and wingless adult female
Description: Adults: males are ash gray 
moths 1 1V2" wingspan): flightless females 
have stubby wings. Larvae: pale yellow 
caterpillars with red heads; bodies covered 
with tufts of light and dark hairs. Eggs: 
covered in white, stiff lather. Found through­
out eastern United States and Canada, west 
to Colorado and British Columbia.
Damage: Larvae feed on leaves of 
deciduous trees and shrubs, but cause little
permanent damage unless numerous.
Life Cycle: Overwintering eggs hatch in 
spring; larvae develop for 4-6 weeks, then 
pupate in cocoons on nearby trees; adults 
emerge in 2 weeks, mate, and lay eggs on old 
cocoons. Up to 3 generations per year.
Control: Scrape egg masses from tree 
trunks or branches: spray BTK to control 
larvae; attract birds and parasitic and preda­
tory insects.
V inegar Fly/Fruit Fly Drosophila melanogaster
Adult
Description: Adults: yellowish, clear- 
winged . '/«o" flies, also called fruit flies. 
Larvae: small white maggots. Found through­
out North America.
Damage: Flies are a nuisance around 
commercial canning and packing houses, 
also in kitchens; maggots feed on microor­
ganisms in decaying fruit or plants.
Life Cycle: Females lay up to 2,000 eggs 
each in overripe or fermenting fruit; maggots 
feed for several days then pupate for several 
days. Life cycle takes 10 days.
Control: The best control is sanitation, 
removing garbage and fermenting fruit; grow 
crack-resistant tomato cultivars to prevent 
fruit from being infested in the field.
Copyrighted material

334 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
W ebworm, Fall H yphantria cunea
Larvae and nest
Larvae and nest
Description: Adults: satiny white moths 
with black dots on forewings (1V2" wingspread). 
Larvae: beige caterpillars covered with dense 
yellow to brown hairs and long white hairs on 
sides. Found throughout United States and in 
southern Canada.
Damage: Larvae chew leaves and spin 
large, conspicuous webs over ends of branches 
of many deciduous trees and shrubs.
Life Cycle: Adults emerge from over­
wintering pupae in late spring and lay eggs; 
groups of larvae cover foliage with webbing 
and feed inside it through midsummer; 
larvae leave webs to pupate in soil debris. Up 
to 2 generations per year.
Control: Prune and destroy branches 
with webs; spray BTK on leaves around web 
when larvae are small or when last stage 
larvae wander outside of web; attract native 
parasitic wasps.
W ebworm, G arden Achyra m n ta lis
Larva and webbing 
Adult
Description: Adults: brown moths with 
pale gold marks on wings (1" wingspan). 
Larvae: pale green to nearly black caterpil­
lars with a dark or light stripe down the back 
and 3 dark spots on the side of each segment. 
Found throughout North America.
Damage: Caterpillars spin silk webbing 
around leaves of vegetables, strawberries, 
and some weeds, devouring enclosed leaves.
Life Cycle: Pupae overwinter in soil-
borne cocoons; moths emerge in late spring 
to midsummer and lay eggs, which hatch in a 
week. Caterpillars feed for a month, then 
pupate. Up to 3 generations per year.
Control: Pick caterpillars from plants 
and drop into a pail of soapy water; destroy 
webbing; spray BTK on leaves when larvae 
are small, before webbing is extensive; spray 
pyrethrin as a last resort.
Copyrighted materi il

WHITHFIJHS ■ 
335
( Family Aleyrodidae)
Greenhouse whitefly lan ae
Greenhouse whiteflies
Sweet potato whiteflies
Description: Adults: minute sucking 
insects with powdery white wings: whiteflies 
rest in luge numbers on leaf undersides and 
fly out in clouds when disturbed. Larvae: 
flattened, legless, translucent,'/»" scales on 
leaf undersides. Eggs: gray or yellow cones 
the size of a pinpoint. Commonly found in 
greenhouses throughout North America: also 
found outdoors in warm regions of California, 
Florida, the Gulf states, and area on the 
West Coast.
Domage: Nymphs and adults suck plant 
juices trom citrus, greenhouse foliage plants, 
ornamentals, and vegetables. Their feeding 
weakens plants: they also secrete a sticky, 
sugary substance called honeydew. Sooty 
mold, a black fungus, grows on the honeydew- 
coated leaves and fruit. Whitefly feeding can 
also spread viral diseases.
Life Cycle: Females lay eggs on under­
sides of leaves: these hatch in 2 days into liny, 
mobile scales: while continuing to feed on 
plant juices, scales molt to a legless stage in a 
few days. After several growth stages, nymphs 
rest in a sort of pupal stage before emerging 
as adults. Most whitefly species require 
20-30 days for a complete life cycle at room 
temperature, less in the summer. Numerous 
overlapping generations per year, continuing 
all winter in greenhouses and warm climates.
Control: Catch adults on yellow sticky 
traps: vacuum adults from leaves: indoors, 
release Encarsia formosa parasitic wasps to 
control greenhouse whitefly: outdoors, attract 
native parasitic wasps and predatory beetles: 
spray with insecticidal soap, kinoprene 
(Enstar), or garlic oil; as a last resort, spray 
with pyrethrin.
Copyrighted material

336 
■ 
INSECT IDENTIFICATION GUIDE
W ireworm s L im onius spp.
Larvae
Adult
Description: Adults: hard-shelled, 
elongated, dark-colored, xh "-'/•»" beetles with 
lengthwise grooves on wing covers: often 
called click beetles, they make a clicking 
sound as they flip from their backs onto their 
feet. Larvae: yellow to reddish brown, jointed, 
wirelike, I'-lV /'longw orm s. Found through­
out North America.
Damage: Larvae bore into newly planted 
seeds or into plant roots, tubers, and bulbs, 
preventing germination or stunting and killing 
plants. Plants attacked include gladiolus and 
other flower corms, small grains, and most veg­
etable crops. Wireworms are most common 
in soil recently in sod. Adult beetles feed on 
leaves and flowers, but cause little damage.
Larval damage
Life Cycle: Adults lay eggs on roots in 
early spring: larvae hatch in 3-10 days: 
larvae spend 2-6 years feeding on surface 
roots in the spring and fall and move deeper 
into the soil to overwinter. Mature larvae 
pupate in late summer and overwinter as 
adults. One generation in 2-6 years.
Control: Cultivate thoroughly every week 
for 4-6 weeks in fall to expose and destroy 
larvae; delay planting tubers and corms until 
soil is very warm, keeping soil bare until 
planting; allow chickens to run on infested 
ground to eat larvae; bury raw potato pieces 
4"-6"deep to attract larvae, check every 1-2 
days and destroy wireworms; apply parasitic 
nematodes to soil.
W oollybears (Family Arctiidac)
Salt marsh caterpillar
Salt man h 
Kih rpillm adult
Description: Adults: white or yellowish 
caterpillars; hair may be yellow, brown, or
moths with a small dark spot on each wing 
black at either end of caterpillar and rust
(P/2" wingspan). Larvae: densely hairy. 1 "-2" 
brown around the middle. Often seen in fall;

YELLOW JACKETS ■ 
337
rolls into a ball when touched. Found through­
out North America.
Damage: Caterpillars feed on tender 
stems, leaves, or flowers of garden plants and 
ornamentals, chewing ragged holes. Popula­
tions usually not seriously damaging.
Life Cycle: Pupae overwinter in woolly
Yellow Jackets Vespula spp.
Bald faced hornet 
Western yellow jacket
Description: Adults: lh n-*fy" wasps with 
a yellow and black striped abdomen and 2 
pairs of membranous wings. Larvae: white 
grubs that develop inside cells in paper nests. 
Found throughout North America.
Beneficial Effect: Good general preda­
tors on flies, caterpillars, and other pests. 
Adult wasps generally feed on sugary solutions, 
such as I lower nectar or juices of ripe fruit. 
Can be pests at picnics.
Life Cycle: Queen wasps overwinter 
under bark or in protected burrows, emerg­
ing in spring to build a small nucleus of 
paper cells in the ground, in an old log, or 
attached to a tree limb. Queens lay eggs and
cocoons among leaves, trash, or clods of soil 
Moths emerge to lay eggs in spring. Two or 
more generations per year.
Control: Control usually not necessary. 
Spray BTK when caterpillars are feeding on 
plants.
capture prey for the first brood of larvae, 
which hatch into workers: the feeding task is 
then taken over by succeeding broods of 
worker wasps. The colony expands until late 
summer: then worker wasps die off before 
winter, and a few young, newly mated females 
leave the nest to overwinter in protected 
spots as next year's queens. The original nest 
is deserted.
HOW to Attract: Not usually necessary 
to attract them or to control them. Since 
some species do sting when disturbed, remove 
nests from areas frequented by people: it is 
not necessary to remove nests located out of 
harm's way.
Copyrighted material

v-iv. ■ •••„,..•
mmm
*
Sv-*

he best approach to disease problems is to prevent 
them. Many good organic gardening practices are 
natural disease-preventive measures. Keeping soil healthy, 
keeping plants properly watered, cleaning up the 
garden, and rotating crops in the vegetable garden are 
on the list of practices that help discourage disease.
•V 
'' 
-J}?..

D e a lin g  with plant diseases can be one of 
the most challenging aspects of pest control. 
Unlike insects, which are usually easy to spot, 
most organisms that cause disease are too 
small to see without a magnifying glass or 
microscope. Disease symptoms can be vari­
able and subtle, so they're tricky to diagnose 
and sometimes easy to miss until the problem 
is quite severe. Once you diagnose a problem, 
there is not a broad range of organically accept­
able controls. And in some cases, if you haven't 
noticed symptoms in time, there's no remedy, 
chemical or organic, for plant diseases. Your 
only option is to pull up the diseased plant 
and destroy it.
What Is Disease?
What do we mean when we say a plant is 
diseased? If you accidentally skin the bark off 
the base of a tree with your lawn mower, is 
that tree diseased? If spring frosts slightly burn 
the leaves on broccoli transplants, are those 
plants diseased? Are pea plants infected with 
beneficial root-nodule bacteria diseased?
Even plant pathologists—scientists who 
study plant diseases—don't agree on a single 
definition of disease. A working definition 
accepted by most is that disease is an irrita­
tion that disturbs a plant's normal functions 
(such as water uptake or cell division). Some 
scientists further restrict the above definition 
to conditions or organisms that cause contin­
uous irritation, making the above-mentioned 
“lawn-mower blight" not a disease (unless you 
injure your plant every time you mow!).
In this chapter, we'll divide plant diseases 
into two broad categories. Infectious diseases
are those diseases that can be transmitted 
from one plant to another. Noninfectious 
diseases—which we call plant disorders—are 
problems that cannot be transmitted.
How Diseases Affect Plants
The effect of a disease or disorder on a 
plant can range from a hardly noticeable 
decrease in yield to sudden wilting and death. 
All diseases interfere with normal plant growth, 
but the ways in which different diseases cause 
damage varies. Diseases caused by fungi and 
bacteria often weaken plants by literally eat­
ing food the plant has made for itself. Disease- 
causing organisms also harm plants by injecting 
them with toxins and by plugging up water 
and nutrient-conducting vessels. A disease can 
alter the hormone balance within a plant, 
resulting in galls that upset movement of food 
and water within a plant. Disorders such as 
nutrient deficiencies can slow growth, and 
prevent proper development of flowers or fruit.
However, not all conditions that meet the 
technical definition of disease are detrimen­
tal to plants. Nodules on the roots of peas and 
beans are caused by bacteria, and they do 
interrupt some of the normal plant functions, 
so they are a "disease.” Their net effect, however, 
is beneficial because these bacteria take nitro­
gen from the air and convert it into a form that 
plants can use. Similarly, the roots of almost 
all plants are infected with mycorrhizal fungi. 
Although they sap some food from plants, 
these beneficial fungi help their host plants 
garner nutrients from the soil by increasing 
the effective surface area of the root system.
The first step you can take toward van­
quishing diseases from your garden is to learn
340

WHAT IS DISEASE? ■ 
3*1
Plant Diseases Make History
W
hen humans first began cultivating 
plants, they unknowingly also increased 
the likelihood of plant diseases. As agricul­
ture spread, farmers took plants out of their 
diverse natural environments and began grow­
ing similar plants close together; this made it 
easier for disease-causing microorganisms 
to spread from one plant to the next. Today, 
over 50,000 diseases are known to afflict 
cultivated plants.
Early Concepts of Disease
Though the couses of diseoses were a 
mystery, plant diseases themselves were not 
overlooked by the earliest gardeners. Dis­
eases figure into early religious writings and 
practices, including the Bible: "I smote you 
with blight and mildew; I laid waste your 
gardens and vineyards." (Amos 4:9).
In ancient times, many societies inter­
preted crop failure as a sign of retaliation 
from some higher power. Wheat rust, for 
example, wos such a problem for the Romans 
tha they created a god of rust. Each spring, 
before the rust appeared, the Romans held a 
feslival to appease the god and attempt to 
save their wheat crop.
Although they did not develop any prac­
tical cures, there were some careful observ­
ers of plant diseases among the ancients. 
Theophrastus, a Greek philosopher and natu­
ralist in the third century B.C., recorded which 
plants were most susceptible to diseases as 
wel as the influence of soil and weather on 
disease.
The invention of the compound micro­
scope in the early 15 00 s set the stage for an 
understanding of the causes for plant diseases. 
Almost a century later, the Dutch naturalist 
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek w as the first per­
son to actually see bacteria through the lens 
of a microscope.
Late Blight Blasts Ireland
It wos o large-scole tragedy-the Irish 
potato famme-that provided the impetus for 
more research into the causes of plant dis­
eases. In 1845 and 1846, cool, rainy condi­
tions provided ideal conditions for the spread 
of the disease we now know as late blight. 
This blight swept through the potato crop, 
destroying the major food source of the Irish 
people. A million Irish peasants starved and 
more than a million additional people fled the 
country, many to America.
This great tragedy stirred o young sci­
entist, Heinrich Anton DeBary, to review many 
of the previous experiments concerned with 
the causes for plant diseases. In 1853, at the 
age of 22, he published a book that conclu­
sively proved that fungi were a cause and not 
a result of disease.
The Downy Mildew Disaster
Other diseases further spurred study of 
the biology and control of plant diseases. In the 
1870s, downy mildew w as accidentally intro­
duced from its native home of North America 
into France. Downy mildew caused severe 
damage to French vineyards in just a few years.
During this time, Dr. Pierre Millardet, a 
French scientist studying vine diseases, was 
walking along a road in the Bordeaux region 
one day, and he happened to notice that some 
grope vines bordering the road were free of 
mildew. Upon inquiry, he found that the owner 
of the vineyard had mode a solution of blue- 
stone (copper sulfate) and lime and spattered 
it with a broom on those vines bordering the 
road, hoping that the ominous blue-green 
color of the gropes would discourage pilferers. 
Within three years, Millardet perfected the 
compound, which came to be known as bor­
deaux mix and is still in use today.

542 
■ 
DISEASES
about the various types of diseases and how 
they develop or spread. The three most com­
mon kinds of organisms that cause infectious 
plant diseases are fungi, bacteria, and viruses. 
By learning about these organisms—how they 
infect plants and how they reproduce—you 
can plan a gardening strategy that will mini­
mize disease. For example, it helps to know 
that warm, wet conditions encourage the spread 
of most fungal diseases and that insect feed­
ing is one of the most important factors in the 
spread of viral diseases. You’ll learn more 
about the types of infectious diseases and the 
environmental conditions that favor their devel­
opment under “Infectious Diseases’’ below.
Understanding how environment and 
nutrient balance affect plant growth can help 
you prevent plant disorders. Learning about 
the different light requirements of plants will 
help you choose the right planting sites to 
encourage best plant performance. Realizing 
that a plant label can tighten around a grow­
ing stem to the point that it cuts off the flow of 
water and nutrients through the plant will 
help motivate you to remember to remove 
labels from newly purchased plants. You’ll 
find more information about causes of plant 
disorders and how you can avoid them on 
page 355.
Infectious Diseases
When we talk about disease in relation to 
animals or humans, we talk about their being 
spread by germs. Germs are the tiny organ­
isms such as viruses and bacteria that can 
cause disease. These types of organisms also 
cause plant diseases.
A more scientific term for disease-causing 
organisms is the word pathogen. In addition 
to fungi and bacteria, viruses, nematodes, and 
parasitic plants are plant pathogens. These 
organisms run the spectrum in food preferences. 
Some are nourished mostly from dead organic
materials, and occasionally a living plant. Oth­
ers can grow and multiply only when they 
have infected a living plant. Plant pathogens 
do not attack humans or other animals. An 
exception is certain viruses that multiply within 
the insects that carry them.
How Disease Develops
If you place a Colorado potato beetle on 
a potato leaf, and the beetle doesn’t eat 
anything, you don’t have a pest problem. 
Similarly, if you put rust fungus particles on a 
snapdragon leaf, and they don’t infect the leaf, 
you don't have a disease problem. Disease 
only occurs when the proper environmental 
conditions exist to allow the pathogen to pen­
etrate and grow into the host plant. You can 
picture this interrelationship between organism, 
environment, and plant as a triangle, like the 
one shown below.
The development of disease depends on an 
interaction of several factors, including the 
host plant, the pathogen, and the environment. 
Each of these factors has to be present for 
disease to occur

INFECTIOUS DISEASES ■ 
543
Before any disease symptoms show up on 
your plant, three conditions must be met.
1. The pathogen must be present. The 
stage of the pathogen that can infect a plant is 
technically known as inoculum. Inoculum may 
be a virus particle, a bacterial cell, a fungal 
spore or hypha, a nematode, or a seed or a 
piece of a parasitic plant.
2. There must be a susceptible plant. 
For example, a tomato plant is susceptible to 
damping-off disease when it is a small seedling, 
but is resistant to this disease when it is grow­
ing luxuriantly in midsummer. Club root fungi 
in the soil can attack cabbage roots, but can­
not infect tomato roots.
3. Environmental conditions must be 
favorable. The most important environmen­
tal factors affecting disease development are 
moisture, temperature, light, and soil fertility. 
In the case of many diseases, a susceptible 
plant and the inoculum are present through­
out the growing season. It is the daily changes 
in the environment that determine the extent 
of disease. A summer thundershower or a 
gusty, drying wind can change conditions almost 
within minutes, perhaps providing the right 
environment for disease to develop.
The Disease Cycle
The steps that a disease goes through 
over time is known as the disease cycle. The 
survival and spread of a disease depends on its 
success in completing all stages of its cycle.
Inoculation. This is the first step in the 
development of any infectious disease. Inocu­
lation occurs when the disease-causing factor 
(the inoculum) comes into contact with the 
plant. There are many ways by which patho­
gens can spread to your plants, including wind, 
rain, insect feeding, contaminated tools, and 
in infected seeds or transplants. For more in­
formation on how pathogens disperse, see 
“Reproduction, dissemination, and overwin­
tering” on page 344.
Penetration and infection. If the envi­
ronment is right, infection begins soon after 
the inoculum comes into contact with a sus­
ceptible plant. Bacteria, viruses, and myco- 
plasmas can infect plants only through wounds 
or natural openings. Wounds are holes in the 
plant caused by pruning, careless use of equip­
ment. animal feeding, storm damage, or rough 
handling by the gardener. Natural openings 
include leaf pores, called stomates, and open­
ings near the ends of veins at the margins of 
leaves, called hydathodes. The scar that remains 
when a leaf falls may also provide entry for 
disease. Flowers provide natural openings for 
pathogen entry, and the pathogen may even 
be brought to the flower on an insect seeking 
nectar. The bark and branches of woody plants 
are pocked with small pores developed for gas 
exchange (called lenticels) that also provide 
entry for pathogens.
Fungi, nematodes, and paiasitic plants 
may enter host plants either through natural 
openings or directly through intact surfaces. 
As spores of fungi and seeds of parasitic plants 
germinate, they develop small shoots and thin, 
elongating strands that can push right into the 
plant. Then, as they grow, the fungi secrete 
enzymes or toxins that dissolve or kill plant 
cells in their path. Parasitic plants send tentacle­
like structures into the stem of the host plant. 
Nematodes penetrate cells with their sharply 
pointed mouthparts.
Just because a pathogen penetrates a host 
does not mean that the host will become 
diseased. Sometimes pathogens enter hosts 
that are not susceptible to the disease; in this 
case, the pathogen will die and no disease 
symptoms develop. However, once the patho­
gen successfully penetrates a susceptible host, 
the pathogen can establish contact with a cell 
and begin getting nourishment from the host 
plant. This is known as infection.
Incubation and invasion. The time be­

544 
■ 
DISEASES
tween infection and the appearance of visible 
symptoms is called the incubation period. The 
incubation period may last days, months, or 
even years (in the case of some viral diseases). 
During this time, the pathogen will be growing, 
multiplying, and spreading, yet the plant will 
not show any symptoms of a disease problem.
Disease organisms may infect only a part 
of the plant, or may spread through the entire 
plant. Viruses and bacteria are systemic, liv­
ing within the cells. In contrast, the fungus 
that causes sooty mold never penetrates the 
plant at all. (This fungus feeds on insect hon­
eydew dripped on the surfaces of leaves and 
fruit.) Powdery mildew fungi grow mostly on 
the outside of the plant, except for small struc­
tures called penetration pegs that grow into 
the plant to extract food. In a disease such as 
apple scab, the fungus grows just beneath the 
outer layer of plant cells. The fungus that 
causes peach leaf curl lives within the plant 
but between plant cells, and the club root 
fungus is an example of a fungus that invades 
the plant cells.
Reproduction, dissemination, and over­
wintering. As the disease organisms spread 
through the host and obtain nutrients, they 
increase in size, number, or both. The way 
pathogens reproduce varies. Fungi produce 
spores, bacteria split apart, viruses are repli­
cated by the cells they infect, nematodes lay 
eggs, and parasitic plants produce seeds.
To ensure their survival, pathogens have 
devised various ways of traveling to new host 
plants. Wind or water can spread inoculum 
over great distances. Inoculum also may hitch­
hike on insects. Many viruses, for example, 
are carried from one plant to the next on the 
mouthparts of aphids. Birds and animals may 
carry inoculum on their feet. Humans can 
spread inoculum as they work in the garden, 
touching plants with their hands and tools. A 
soilborne fungus such as Fusarium may be 
carried from infected soil to healthy soil on a
trowel. Nematodes also transmit viruses as 
they feed and can carry bacteria and fungal 
spores as they move from plant to plant.
Plant Defenses
Considering the many methods patho­
gens have evolved to ensure their survival, you 
may wonder how you can have any healthy 
plants at all in your garden! Fortunately, plants 
are by no means passive players in the disease 
process.
Structural defenses. Plants have natural 
features that help ward off attack by a pathogen. 
A thick, waxy layer on the leaf surface can 
stop mechanical penetration by fungi; an impen­
etrable cell wall may impede progress of a 
fungus within a plant. A plant may be resistant 
to bacterial attack because it has small pores 
that bacteria cannot get through easily. Similarly, 
hairs on leaves or fruit of many plants may 
shed water, increasing resistance to diseases 
that need water in order to develop.
Chemical defenses. Some plants contain 
biochemicals that help them resist diseases. 
Cells commonly release various substances, 
some of which may be toxic to nearby fungi or 
bacteria. For example, wilt-resistant pea culti­
vars exude from their roots a chemical that is 
toxic to wilt-producing fungi. Plant cells may 
also contain protective biochemicals that can 
slow or stop the growth of a pathogenic fun­
gus or bacterium once it penetrates the plant. 
Part of the Verticillium resistance of potato is 
due to such protective biochemicals within 
the cells of resistant cultivars.
Some protective biochemicals are not nor­
mally found in healthy plants, but are pro­
duced after a plant has been attacked by a 
disease-causing organism. For example, one 
way fungi advance into plant tissue is by secret­
ing enzymes that dissolve cell walls. If a par­
ticular plant can produce biochemicals that 
inactivate that enzyme, the attack will be 
stopped.

IN'FI-CHOI S DISEASES 
■ 
545
In other cases, a plant might produce 
biochemicals directly toxic to the attacking 
pathogen. For instance, specific biochemicals 
have been found that protect certain cultivars 
of sweet potato from black rot. Some plants
can transform a toxin produced by a pathogen 
into a nontoxic product. Tomato cultivars 
resistant to Fusarium wilt can metabolize the 
toxin produced by the Fusarium fungus into a 
harmless product.
Significant Symptoms
I
nfectious diseases are often classified by 
•he type of symptom they cause. If you can 
identify the symptoms, you may be able to 
successfully control the disease, even if you 
don't know the specific pathogen causing 
the infection. The appearance of some com­
mon disease terms are explained below If 
these symptoms seem to match ones on your 
plants, turn to "Disease Symptom Guide" on 
page 370, where you'll find additional descrip­
tions and photographs of particular diseases 
as well as information on how to prevent ond 
control them.
Blights: When plants suffer from blight, 
leaves or branches suddenly wither, stop 
growing, and die. Later, plant parts may rot. 
CoTimon blights include fire blight, Alternaria 
blight, and bacterial blights.
Cankers: Cankers usually form on woody 
stems and may be cracks, sunken areas, or 
raised areas of dead or abnormal tissue. Some­
times conkers ooze conspicuously. Cankers 
can girdle shoots or trunks, causing every­
thing above the canker to wilt and die.
Galls: Galls are swollen masses of abnor­
mal tissue. They can be caused by fungi and 
bacteria as well as certain insects. If you cut 
open a gall and there is no sign of an insect 
inside, suspect disease.
Leaf blisters and curls: Blisters are yel­
low bumps on the upper surfaces of the leaves 
with gray depressions on the lower surfaces. 
On plants suffering from leaf curl diseases,
the new leaves are pale or reddish and the 
midrib doesn't grow properly. The leaves 
become puckered and curled as they expand.
Mildews: There are two common types 
of mildews: downy mildew and powdery mil­
dew. The primary symptom ot downy mildew 
is a white to purple, downy growth, usually on 
the undersides of leaves and along stems, 
which turns black with age. Powdery mildew 
first appears as a white to grayish powdery 
growth, usually on the upper surfaces of leaves.
Rots: Rots are diseases that decay roots, 
stems, wood, flowers, and fruit. Some dis­
eases cause leaves to rot, but those symp­
toms tend to be described as leaf spots and 
blights. Rots can be soft and squishy or hard 
and dry.
Rusts: Rusts are a specific type of fun­
gal disease. Many of them require two differ­
ent plant species as hosts to complete their 
life cycles. Typical rust symptoms include a 
powdery tan to rust-colored coating or soft 
tentacles. Cedar-apple rust and white pine 
blister rust are two common rust problems 
that can appear in home landscapes
Wilts: Plants wilt when they don't get 
enough water. When fungi or bacteria attack 
or clog a plant's water-conducting system, 
they can cause permanent wilting, often fol­
lowed by the death of all or part of the plant. 
Wilt symptoms may resemble those of blights. 
Wilting may also be from a cultural problem, 
such as improper watering.

346 ■ 
DISEASES
Fungi
Of all the plant pathogens, the ones you’ll 
deal with most frequently are the fungi. All 
plants are susceptible to attack by some type 
of fungus. There are more than 100,000 spe­
cies of fungi, about 8.000 of which cause 
plant diseases.
What They Are
From the gardener’s perspective, fungi are 
generally beneficial. Fungi decompose dead 
plants and animals, recycling nutrients back 
into the soil. Fungi also help aggregate soil 
particles into clumps, creating pore spaces 
that allow the soil to hold both air and water 
for good plant growth. Many beneficial fungi 
suppress the development of other fungi that 
cause plant diseases. Yeasts that ferment malt 
into beer or grapes into wine are fungi, as are 
mushrooms that we eat.
If you examine the roots of almost any 
plant, you’ll find that ihey are infected with a 
beneficial type of fungus called mycorrhizal 
fungus. Infection actually helps the plants by 
improving the uptake of nutrients, especially 
phosphorus. The fungi also influence a plant's 
ability to tolerate drought and to ward off 
microorganisms that attack roots. Soil steril­
ization and certain pesticides will discourage 
mycorrhizal associations.
However, fungi are responsible for some 
common garden plant diseases, including pow­
dery mildew, damping-off, late blight, apple 
scab, and corn smut.
Fungi can often be seen with the naked 
eye, as is the case with mushrooms, molds, 
and mildews. Fungi are multi-celled and have 
threadlike bodies called hyphae that spread 
over plants. The hyphae sometimes grow mostly 
on plant surfaces and sometimes penetrate 
plant cells. With powdery mildew infection, 
hyphae form a white coating on the plant 
surface and occasionally send feeding pegs 
into plant cells. In other diseases, fungal hyphae 
grow right into the plant, secreting enzymes
that dissolve cell walls as they proceed.
Fungi also form spores, which are tiny, 
seedlike structures ranging from 1 micron (0.001 
millimeter) to 1 millimeter in size. Spores are 
more tolerant of unfavorable conditions, such 
as winter cold or summer heat, than actively 
growing hyphae, so spores are the overwinter­
ing form of most fungi.
Most fungi produce two or three differ­
ent types of spores during their life cycles; 
fungi that cause rust diseases may produce 
five different types. Spores may be produced 
on fruiting bodies that range in size from micro­
scopic to the size of a basketball. Mushrooms 
and truffles are also fruiting bodies.
What You See
Fungal diseases result in a spectrum of 
plant symptoms on roots, stems, leaves, and 
flowers. Fungal diseases fall into one of two 
general categories: those from fungi that live 
in the soil, attacking roots or crowns of plants: 
and those from fungi whose spores are dis­
persed in the air, attacking aboveground parts 
of plants.
The list below identifies some of the most 
common symptoms caused by fungal diseases.
■  Damping-off can kill seedlings before 
they even break through the soil, but it also 
strikes seedlings just an inch or so tall. The 
fungi rot the stem right at the soil line and, 
overnight, infected seedlings topple over.
■  Root rots generally attack older plants, 
killing the tiny rootlets and appearing above 
ground as stunting and wilting.
■  Fungal wilts damage a wide range of 
plants, plugging up the plant’s water-conducting 
vessels and causing leaves to wilt and die.
■  Club root commonly infects cabbage 
family plants, causing large swellings on roots 
and stunted or dead plants.
■  Blights include early and late blight, 
which attack tomatoes and their relatives. The 
fungi can damage or kill leaves and cause rot

INFECTIOUS DISEASES 
■ 
547
in the fruit or tubers. Other fungal blights, 
such as juniper blight, attack woody plants.
■  Mildews include downy and powdery 
mildew. Infection results in spots or white 
patches on leaves, shoots, and other plant 
parts. Downy mildew can kill plants rapidly; 
powder}' mildew commonly causes poor growth 
and lower yield, but seldom kills the plant.
■  Rusts produce orange or white spots, 
usually on leaves and stems, weakening plants 
and reducing crop yields.
■  Leaf spot symptoms are caused by a 
wide range of fungi, including Alternaria, 
Septoria, and anthracnose.
Other fungal diseases cause swellings on 
plant parts, such as black knot of plum and 
cherry, or sunken areas in stems, as with 
Cytospora canker. On fruit, fungi can cause 
hard, black patches (scab), soft spots (rot), or 
fuzzy gray mold (Botrytis rot).
How They Spread
Spore production gives fungi the ability 
to travel great distances. The spores are easily 
picked up and carried by water or animals— 
including gardeners! Spores are light enough 
to waft up into plants from the ground, as 
apple scab spores do when they drift from 
dead leaves lying on the ground up into apple 
trees in spring. Spores of a fungus such as 
cedar-apple rust can travel miles from cedars 
to infect apples, and spores of a disease such 
as wheat rust can hitchhike hundreds of miles 
on the atmospheric jet stream.
How to Prevent
One of the best ways to prevent fungal 
problems is to select plants that are resistant 
to the fungal diseases common in your area. 
However, even if you plant a susceptible culti­
var or species, there are some steps you can 
take to help lessen the chance of fungal 
infection.
Once spores alight on a susceptible plant, 
they will germinate and produce hyphae if con­
ditions are favorable. Most spores germinate 
best when they are surrounded with water and 
temperatures are warm. There's not much you 
can do about temperature (and some spores, 
such as those causing late blight of potatoes, 
actually germinate best at cool temperatures). 
However, you can help minimize the times 
when plant leaves are wet by choosing a well- 
drained, upland planting site that is basked in 
sunlight and bathed in gentle breezes. Prun­
ing keeps plants open, allowing air and sun to 
quickly dry branches and leaves following rains 
or morning dew. Crop rotation can starve out 
soilborne pathogens.
Although they are not usually thought of 
as fungicides, antitranspirants and superior 
oil sprays may help protect plants from fungal 
infections. Antitranspirants, such as Wilt-Pruf, 
are normally sprayed on trees and shrubs to 
protect them from winter damage. Oil sprays 
are commonly used for controlling insects. 
Both of these products form a coating on 
leaves that seems to prevent spore germina­
tion and penetration. For more information 
on using antitranspirants, see page 441; see 
page 478 for details on applying superior oil.
How to Control
Even though preventive measures can go 
a long way in reducing the incidence of fungal 
diseases, you will probably have occasional 
need for some control measure. For airborne 
fungi, which produce symptoms on above­
ground plant parts, picking off the infected 
part can help reduce the spread of the disease. 
If a plant is seriously infected, remove the 
entire plant. Place the infected pieces or plants 
in the center of a hot compost pile, or place in 
sealed containers and dispose of them with 
household trash.
For serious outbreaks, you may choose a 
homemade or commercial organic fungicide. 
Home remedies include baking soda spray for

348 ■ 
DISEASES
black spot on roses and garlic spray for a 
range of fungal problems.
Sulfur is probably the most commonly 
used organic fungicide, although plain sulfur 
is more a protective measure than a control. 
Sulfur doesn't kill fungal spores, but it does 
prevent them from germinating on the plant 
surface. Another useful control is lime-sulfur, 
which can kill recently germinated disease 
spores. Copper-based fungicides, such as cop­
per sulfate and bordeaux mix, also inhibit the 
germination and growth of fungal spores.
Soilborne fungi are the most difficult to 
control. If possible, dig up and dispose of the 
infected soil. Or try solarizing your soil by 
laying a sheet of clear plastic over the moist­
ened area and letting the sun “cook" the soil 
for a few weeks. For more details on soil 
solarization, see page 424.
Bacteria
Bacteria are found almost everywhere on 
Earth, even in such inhospitable habitats as 
deserts, hot springs, and highly acidic waste 
products from mining operations. These single­
celled organisms can cause many serious plant 
diseases, including soft rot, crown gall, fire 
blight, and bacterial wilt.
Vl'hat They Are
Bacterial cells are large enough to be 
visible through the common light microscope; 
still. 25,000 cells laid end-to-end would make 
up only 1 inch. The cells are of various shapes, 
including spheres, rods, spirals, and filaments. 
Those that cause plant diseases are mostly 
rod-shaped.
Bacterial cells divide by a process called 
fission. Each cell pinches itself in half, then 
the halves separate, resulting in two cells. Un­
der ideal conditions, a single cell can divide 
every 30 minutes. If the resulting cells from 
each division keep on dividing, this would 
result in 8,388,608 bacterial cells in only 12
Plant pathogens come in a range of sizes. Large 
pathogens, including nematodes and many 
fungi, live mainly outside plant cells and insert 
specialized feeding structures into cells. Other 
pathogens, such as virus particles, are small 
enough to live entirely within cells.
hours! We are not knee-deep in bacteria be­
cause conditions are rarely ideal for contin­
ued growth of bacteria. As bacterial popula­
tions grow, they become overcrowded, use up 
their food supply, and wallow in their own 
waste products. Growth then stops or slows 
dramatically. Bacteria also are susceptible to 
infection by viral diseases.
Most bacteria are beneficial, increasing 
the fertility of the soil as they take nitrogen 
from the air and make it available to plants, 
and recycling nutrients in dead plants and 
animals. A single teaspoon of good garden

INFECTIOUS DISEASES ■ 
349
Name That Disease
P
lant pathologists classify most disease 
organisms with a scientific name-called 
a binomial-consisting of two parts. The first 
word of the name is the genus, the second 
word is the species. Usually, these words are 
derived from Latin words. In most coses gar­
deners don't use scientific names when 
describing diseases. However, in some cases, 
knowing the scientific name of a disease can 
be helpful.
For example, both apples and cucum- 
bers can suffer from pow dery mildew. 
Pcdosphaera leucotricho is the organism that 
causes powdery mildew on apple, while 
Sphaerotheca fuligineo is the one that causes 
powdery mildew on cucumber. Armed with 
the knowledge that the fungus that causes 
pcwdery mildew on apples is different from 
the one that causes powdery mildew on 
cucumbers, you know that you need not worry 
about mildew spreading from your apple tree 
to your cucumber plants, or vice versa.
Common names of diseases are often 
bcsed on disease symptoms: Apple scab.
tomato leaf spot, fire blight, and damping-off 
are examples. Sometimes the names don't 
describe the disease with complete accuracy. 
For example, blight technically refers to rapid 
browning and death of leaves, flowers, or 
stems. In the case of chestnut blight, however, 
death is not so quick. Other common names 
of diseases include the scientific name of the 
pathogen, as in the case of Verticillium wilt 
and Fusarium wilt.
A virus usually has a common name that 
includes the plant it w as first identified on, 
along with the symptom produced. Thus, 
cucumber mosaic virus w as first identified 
on cucumber and produces a patchy yellow 
mottling of the leaves. But cucumber mosaic 
virus also attacks many other plants, includ­
ing beans, celery, petunias, ond delphiniums, 
and it doesn't always produce the distinctive 
mosaic symptom. Scientists are working on a 
more precise classification system for viruses, 
based on their chemical makeups, their shapes, 
and their modes of transmission.
soil is teeming with millions of bacteria. Friendly 
bacteria inhabit the digestive tracks of ani­
mals (including humans), aiding digestion, and 
are used in making such foods as yogurt and 
cheese. Special strains of bacteria even have 
been used to help clean up oil spills.
About 200 different bacteria are respon­
sible for plant diseases. Warmth and moisture 
are most conducive to bacterial growth, so 
bacterial diseases generally are worse in warm, 
humid climates. Hence, pears, which are sub­
ject to the bacterial disease fire blight, are not 
extensively grown on a commercial scale in 
the hot. humid Southeast.
What You See
One distinctive symptom of some bacte­
rial diseases is the sticky, gummy material 
secreted by active bacterial cells. If the leaves 
on your cucumber plant are wilting and you 
suspect bacterial wilt disease, cut the stem or 
leaf stalk with a sharp knife. If you see threads 
of slime when you pull the stem or stalk apart, 
this confirms bacterial wilt disease. Active 
fire blight cankers are covered with a similar 
bacterial slime. In many cases the bacterial 
slime has an unpleasant odor.
The following list explains some other 
common bacterial disease symptoms.

350 
■ 
DISEASES
■ Wilts grow within a plant, causing bac­
teria to clog the plant’s water-conducting ves­
sels and the leaves to droop. If your cucumbers 
have ever been infected with bacterial wilt, 
you have seen a dramatic demonstration of 
this symptom—almost overnight, first one. then 
successive leaves collapse.
■ Leaf spots can appear on leaves when 
attacking bacteria kill plant cells.
■ Soft rot develops when bacteria infect 
fleshy fruit, tubers, or roots, secreting enzymes 
and perhaps toxins that break down the cells. 
These infections begin as small, water-soaked 
spots that turn mushy and smelly.
■ Galls form when plants respond to bac­
terial attack by growing an excess of new cells. 
Crown gall, for example, produces swollen 
knots of plant tissue on roots and stems.
■ Cankers are sunken areas produced by 
dead plant cells. Cankers often ooze a slimy 
or gummy substance.
How They Spread
Bacterial cells are spread around your 
garden by splashing rainwater, running water, 
insects, and animals, or on tools and diseased 
plants that you move from one place to another. 
Once bacterial cells are close to a susceptible 
plant, they can enter through wounds or natu­
ral openings. Wounds through which bacteria 
penetrate plants may be caused by insects, 
such as the cucumber beetles that transmit 
bacterial wilt, or by nematodes, which help 
spread bacterial wilt of tomato. You may inad­
vertently pick up and spread bacterial disease 
with your pruning shears. Wounds from hail 
damage also provide easy entry for bacteria.
Natural openings through which bacteria 
may enter plants include the small holes in 
leaves through which water vapor, carbon diox­
ide, and oxygen pass in and out. Other entrance 
points include the tiny glands at the base of 
flowers (known as nectaries) and the pores
in tree bark (known as lenticels). Generally, 
bacteria most easily infect and cause greatest 
damage to young, succulent shoots, perhaps 
because their natural barriers are less well 
developed than those of mature wood.
How to Pret'ent
Good cultural practices are essential to 
prevent bacterial diseases. Always start with 
disease-free seeds and plants. To allow woody 
plants enough time to toughen up their new 
growth before fall, don’t stimulate them in late 
summer by fertilizing, watering, or pruning. 
Trees with soft or succulent growth may suffer 
cold damage such as bark cracking in winter, 
providing entrance for bacteria. To reduce 
the chances of spreading disease inoculum, 
avoid working among wet plants. Crop rota­
tion helps control soilborne bacterial disease, 
such as crown gall. If you know a particular 
bacterial disease is prevalent in your area, 
look for disease-resistant species or cultivars.
The best way to avoid soft rot on stored 
produce, such as carrots and potatoes, is care­
ful harvesting to minimize wounding. During 
storage, keep moisture levels just high enough 
to prevent shriveling.
How to Control
Once they get started, bacterial diseases 
are generally difficult to control. Pick or prune 
off infected plant parts as soon as you spot 
them. Be sure to dip pruning shears in a 10 
percent bleach solution (1 part bleach to 9 
parts water) between cuts. Bury the infected 
pieces in the center of a hot compost pile or 
dispose of them with household trash. Certain 
sprays, such as copper compounds, are par­
tially effective, but will not control these dis­
eases when used alone. Bacteriophages (viruses 
that cause disease in bacteria) may one day 
find more widespread use against bacterial 
diseases.

INFECTIOUS DISEASES ■ 
351
Mystifying 
Mycoplasmas
S
ome diseases once thought to be caused 
by viruses, such as aster yellows, are now 
known to be caused by mycoplasma-like organ­
isms (MLO). Mycoplasmas are extremely small, 
somewhere in size between common bacte­
ria and viruses. Although generally grouped 
with bacteria, mycoplasmas differ from bac­
teria because they lack a cell wall. Each myco­
plasmal cell is enclosed in a soft membrane. 
But mycoplasmas and MLOs, like bacteria re­
spond to antibiotics. They are also similar to 
viruses in that they are transmitted by insects.
Viruses
Among plant pathogens causing infec­
tious diseases, the smallest are viruses and 
related viruslike organisms. Viruses attack every 
form o life on Earth, including humans (caus­
ing such diseases as smallpox, measles, and 
mumps) and other animals, trees, herbaceous 
plants, algae, fungi, and bacteria.
What They 'Are
Virus particles are only about 0.1 to 0.01 
microns in size (1 micron=0.001 millimeter). 
They can only be seen with the aid of an elec­
tron microscope. The typical virus can hardly 
be considered alive, consisting not of a cell 
but merely of nucleic acid (RNA or DNA) 
surrounded by a protein sheath. Viroids are 
even simpler—each is just a strand of RNA.
Viruses and viroids are inactive outside 
of living cells. Once inside a live cell, though, 
these pathogens use the cells "machinery" to 
multiply themselves, upsetting the cell's metab­
olism and causing disease. A single infected 
plant cell may become home to over a million 
virus particles.
While they generally are considered a 
problem, viruses can sometimes give a plant 
desirable properties. For example, solid-color 
tulips, when infected with certain viruses, 
become mottled with bold blotches of color 
(these types are sold as Rembrandt tulips). 
Another virus infects an apple cultivar known 
as ‘Mailing 9*, which is used as a rootstock to 
dwarf apple trees. When special propagation 
techniques were used to rid some Mailing 9' 
plants of the virus, resulting trees no longer 
were as dwarfed.
What You See
Of all potential problems you encounter 
in your garden, viral diseases may be the most 
difficult to identify. Symptoms of a specific 
viral disease can vary from one plant to the 
next, and also may vary depending on plant 
age or growing conditions. A plant can harbor 
a virus but not show any symptoms, or show 
symptoms only when cool weather slows 
growth. Virus symptoms may be hardly notice­
able, causing a slight reduction in yield or 
growth, or may slowly become more pro­
nounced, causing a gradual decline ending in 
death of the plant.
You may be able to identify a viral dis­
ease that produces characteristic symptoms 
and is common in your area. Green and yel­
low mottling on cucumber leaves, for example, 
very likely indicates cucumber mosaic. For 
positive identification where doubt exists, sci­
entists rely on tests of plant sap, or they graft a 
bud from a suspected plant onto another plant 
known to produce characteristic symptoms of 
the particular virus in question.
Some general types of symptoms that char­
acterize viral diseases include:
■ 
Mosaic causes normally green leaves 
or fruit to become mottled with patches of

352 
■ 
DISEASES
light green, yellow, or white areas. On flowers, 
mosaics can result in color breaks, and the 
flowers may be disfigured as well.
■ Rosetting is the term used to describe 
the short, bushy growth caused by some viruses. 
Peach rosette is an example of a virus that 
causes stunting by telescoping down the dis­
tance from one leaf to the next along the 
stem. Leaves or side branches are so close 
together that they grow in a rosette.
■  Ring spot viruses, including those that 
cause peony or dahlia ring spot disease, show 
up as pale, yellow' spots on the leaves.
■  Leaf curling or deformed leaves is 
another common virus-produced symptom.
How They Spread
Viral diseases are not spread by wind or 
water. The virus particles must be brought in 
contact with plants and then either rubbed 
against or injected into the plant so they enter 
the sap.
Many insects, including aphids, leafhop­
pers, and whiteflies, carry viral diseases from 
infected to healthy plants. Mites, nematodes, 
and fungi also transmit viral diseases, as do 
parasitic plants. Any of these organisms cause 
plant damage by themselves, but they pose an 
even greater threat w'hen carrying a virus. 
Plants tolerate a certain amount of aphid 
feeding, for example, with no apparent harm. 
However, if those aphids inject a virus into 
one of your plants, the plant becomes perma­
nently diseased.
Even you can unknowingly spread viral 
diseases to your plants. Smokers are likely to 
pick up tobacco mosaic virus on their fingers, 
and from there, transmit it to other suscepti­
ble plants. The virus can infect hundreds of 
different plants, including tomatoes, peppers, 
eggplants, petunias, apples, and grapes, and 
can surv ive for decades in dried tobacco leaves.
You also may transmit viruses as you prop­
agate plants. If you graft part of a virus-infected
plant—even a single bud—onto a healthy tree, 
viruses from that scion may infect the whole 
tree. Other methods of vegetative propagation, 
such as division or cuttings, will usually also 
produce infected plants if the parent plant 
was carrying a virus. Occasionally, viruses move 
from one plant to another by naturally occur­
ring bark or root grafts. Viruses are only rarely 
carried in seeds or pollen.
How to Prevent
The best way to deal with potential viral 
infections is to avoid them in the first place. 
Since viruses usually spread within a whole 
plant, it is useless to prune off infected leaves 
or stems. Also, there are no sprays that cure 
viral diseases. If possible, do not handle plants 
when they are wet. Wet plants bruise more 
easily, providing entrance for viruses.
If you propagate plants yourself, make 
sure you begin with disease-free plants. When 
buying virus-prone plants, such as strawber­
ries and raspberries, choose ones that are cer­
tified to be virus-free. The raspberry plants 
your neighbor offers you may cost you noth­
ing. but if they are a few years old, they also 
probably have viral infection. To avoid spread­
ing tobacco mosaic virus, wash your hands 
after handling any tobacco product, and do 
not smoke or chew tobacco when working 
with plants.
Many viruses also attack weeds, so good 
weed control can help reduce problems. When 
possible, remove nearby wild or abandoned 
plants known to be susceptible to viruses that 
also attack your plants. Ragweed, nightshade, 
and milkweed, for example, are hosts of cucum­
ber mosaic virus.
Sometimes it is possible to avert viruses 
by controlling insects that spread the disease. 
But good control of the insect is necessary, 
and you must keep the insect from the plant 
or kill it before it has a chance to inject virus 
particles into the sap. You can protect your

INFECTIOUS DISEASES ■ 
353
plants by covering them with floating row cover. 
Reflective mulches of aluminum foil have also 
been successful in repelling virus-transmitting 
aphids from plants.
If you expect a virus problem, you may 
be able to plant a virus-resistant cultivar. For 
example, many peas and beans have been 
bred for resistance to bean mosaic, and breed­
ers have developed tomatoes that resist tobacco 
mosaic virus. In some cases, a cultivar may be 
susceptible to a virus, but not prone to getting 
it because it is resistant to insects that trans­
mit the virus. Such is the case with Royalty' 
purple raspberry, which, though prone to 
mosaic, is resistant to aphids that spread 
the disease.
How to Control
When the presence of a viral disease is 
suspected or confirmed, ruthlessly pull out 
and destroy unhealthy plants to prevent the 
disease from spreading to those that are healthy.
In the future, control may be achieved by 
deliberately infecting plants with certain vi­
ruses. A plant infected with one strain of a 
virus usually is protected from infection by 
another strain of the same virus. Ongoing 
research involves purposely inoculating a plant 
with a virus strain that produces only mild 
disease symptoms to prevent infection by more 
damaging strains.
Nematodes
We share this planet with thousands of 
species of nematodes. While most nematodes 
are not harmful, there are a number that para­
sitize and cause disease in humans and other 
animals. Also, unfortunately, there are many 
that attack and feed on living plants.
What They Are
While they are often described as worm- 
like, nematodes are not closely related to true 
worms. They are multi-cellular animals with
smooth, unsegmented bodies. The nematode 
species that feed on plants are so tiny that you 
need a microscope to see them. They are 
often long and slender, although some species 
appear pear-shaped during their life cycles.
Feeding habits of nematodes vary, depend­
ing on the species. Some feed on the outside 
of the plant, while others burrow into plant 
tissue. While soil-dwelling nematodes are the 
most common culprits, some species damage 
stems, foliage, and flowers.
No matter where they feed, these tiny 
creatures can seriously damage your plants. 
Plant-parasitic nematodes have sharply pointed 
mouthparts that they use to puncture cell walls. 
The real damage occurs when the nematode 
injects saliva into the cell through its mouth­
parts, and then sucks out the cell contents. 
The plant responds with swellings, distorted 
growth, and dead areas. Nematodes can also 
carry viruses and inject them into plants. The 
feeding wounds they make also provide an 
easy entrance point for bacteria and fungi.
There are many species of beneficial nem­
atodes that live in the soil. They may feed on 
decaying material, insects, or other nematodes. 
For more information on these beneficial 
nematodes, see page 309.
What You See
Unlike most other disease-causing organ­
isms, plant-parasitic nematodes seldom pro­
duce any characteristic symptoms. Most of 
the symptoms that do appear are vague and 
often resemble those caused by other factors, 
such as viruses, nutrient deficiencies, or air 
pollution. Nematodes feeding above ground 
may cause leaves, stems, and flowers to be 
twisted and distorted.
If nematodes are feeding on the roots, 
the plant may be yellowed, wilted, or stunted, 
often with a reduced crop yield. If you suspect 
nematodes on the roots, carefully lift one of 
the infected plants and wash off the roots for

354 
■ 
DISEASES
easier inspection. If nematodes are causing 
damage, you may see small galls or lesions, 
injured root tips, root rot, or excessive root 
branching. For a positive diagnosis, contact 
your local extension office for information on 
where you can get your soil tested.
How They Spread
Whether they feed above or below ground, 
most nematodes spend at least part of their 
life cycle in the soil. While they can t move 
very far under their own power, they can swim 
freely in water, and they move more quickly in 
moist soil. They are also spread by anything 
that can carry particles of infested soil, includ­
ing tools, boots, animals, and infected plants.
How to Prevent
There are several cultural techniques you 
can use to reduce the chances of nematode 
problems. Rotate crops that are not prone to 
the same types of nematodes to keep pest 
populations low. Use clean tools and other 
good sanitation practices to minimize the spread 
of nematodes. Dig plenty of organic matter 
into your soil to promote populations of bene­
ficial fungi that feed on nematodes. Look for 
plant species and cultivars that are resistant 
to nematode damage.
How to Control
If you suspect you have a nematode 
problem, consider solarizing the infested area 
by covering the wet soil with a sheet of clear 
plastic. T h e  h eat th at builds up d uring a few 
hot weeks in the summer will kill many of the 
nematodes. ft>r more details on soil solarization, 
see page 424.
Another control technique is to plant a 
cover crop of marigolds in infested soil to 
lower nematode populations. Apparently, some 
species of nematodes are lured to the roots of 
these plants, but once they are there, they are 
unable to lay eggs. Turning under the mari­
golds may also suppress nematode feeding for 
several years. Drenching the soil with neem 
may also be effective.
Parasitic Plants
While they are probably the least com­
mon problem you'll face, parasitic plants can 
attack the plants growing in your garden.
What They Are
Unlike most plants, parasitic plants seldom 
produce their own food through photosynthesis. 
Instead, these plants attach themselves to host 
plants and withdraw water and nutrients from 
the hosts. The two most common parasitic 
plants are mistletoe and dodder.
What You See
Plants attacked by parasitic plants show 
a variety of symptoms and signs. Here are 
some common characteristics.
■  Dwarf mistletoes generally produce 
small tufts of short yellowish or greenish stems. 
They attack many kinds of conifers, such as 
pines, causing cankers or swellings on stems. 
The plants may be stunted, deformed, or killed: 
branches often break off at the cankers.
■  True mistletoes are leafy. They primar­
ily attack deciduous trees. The clusters of green 
stems and leaves are most obvious in winter, 
when the host plant's leaves have dropped.
■  Dodder is a twining plant that has a 
threadlike, leafless, orange or yellow stem. 
Weakened by the parasite, infested plantings 
are quickly smothered by the rampantly grow­
ing vines.
How They Spread
Mistletoes produce sticky berries, which 
are either carried by birds or dropped from 
the mistletoe plant. Dodder spreads by seeds, 
which can be brought in with crop seeds or 
spread by animals or equipment.

DISORDERS ■ 
355
How to Prevent
The best way to avoid problems with par­
asitic plants is to buy clean seeds and plants 
from reputable companies.
How to Control
For mistletoe, the only control measure 
is to remove the parasite. Either cut off the 
mistletoe stems or remove whole infested 
branches or plants.
Once you spot dodder on crops, clean 
any equipment you use in the area thoroughly 
before moving to an uninfected spot. Persis­
tent hand-weeding is the only organic control.
Disorders
Various environmental and cultural prob­
lems are also considered diseases since they 
upset the plant's normal function. Because 
such diseases cannot be transmitted from one 
plant to the next, they can be called noninfec- 
tious diseases or physiological disorders.
Just because they cannot spread, however, 
does not make plant disorders any less serious 
than infectious diseases. Fortunately, disor­
ders are often easy to avoid and to remedy 
with good garden management. It's important 
to be aware of the various factors that affect 
plant growth, so you can try to keep them 
balanced. It's also important to recognize the 
symptoms of disorders so you can treat them 
effectively, instead of mistaking them for an 
infectious disease.
Environmental Problems
Environmental problems are caused by a 
lack or excess of something that a plant needs 
to grow. If, for example, you try to grow a plant 
that likes cool temperatures, shade, and moist 
soil on a hot, dry site, you will obviously have 
difficulty. In other cases, though, the source 
of the problem is not so easy to determine.
What They Are
Some of the factors that can affect plant 
health are water, nutrients, temperature, light, 
oxygen, and air pollution. An imbalance in 
any of these factors can interfere with normal 
plant growth.
What You See
Sometimes it is easy to diagnose environ­
mental problems. If the soil is dry, your wilted 
tomato plant is most likely suffering from 
drought, not from Verticillium wilt. Other 
problems, though, produce much more subtle 
symptoms. For example, continual exposure 
to even low levels of air pollution can reduce 
yields and plant vigor, making plants more 
susceptible to attack by pests or pathogens. 
Here are some common environmental prob­
lems and their associated symptoms.
■  Excessive water often causes greenish 
yellow leaves, or plant wilting due to root rot. 
Some plants develop a condition called edema, 
when tiny white or brown blisters appear on 
stems or lower leaf surfaces.
■  Drought, or too little water, can cause 
wilting, along with leaf scorch (browned leaf 
edges), early fruit or leaf drop, stem dieback, 
and plant death.
■  Irregular watering or a sudden change 
in water status, such as a heavy soaking after a 
dry period, can cause fruit and root crops to 
crack and lower leaves to yellow and drop.
■  Nutrient deficiency, if minor, may have 
barely noticeable symptoms. As a deficiency 
becomes more severe, the crop yield may 
decrease and the plant may show other 
symptoms. Symptoms common to several kinds 
of deficiencies include abnormal leaf color, 
curled leaves, dead growing tips, or smaller- 
than-normal leaves.
■  Nutrient excess of some nutrients can 
cause symptoms similar to those of nutrient

356 
■ 
DISEASES
deficiencies. In other cases, the effects of a 
nutrient excess are indirect. Too much nitrogen, 
for example, will produce lush, healthy-looking 
plants that produce hardly any fruit.
■  Cold temperatures can kill tender buds, 
growing lips, leaves, stems, flowers, or fruit. 
Roots may die. and trunks often crack or form 
cankers.
■  Excessively high temperatures, usually 
coupled with strong, direct sunlight, cause 
browned and blistered stems, leaves, or fruit. 
Young plants may die.
■  Too much light or strong sunlight may 
bum the leaves of shade-loving plants, caus­
ing brown patches or dead leaves. Heavy prun­
ing may expose previously shaded tree limbs 
to the bright sun. producing brown patches 
on trunks and branches. Plants with purplish 
or yellow leaves often fade or burn in direct 
sunlight.
■  Lack of light or too much shade may 
cause pale leaves, spindly yellow stems, or 
death of the plant. Leaves of variegated plants 
may turn evenly green if they don't get enough 
sun.
■  Lack of oxygen is most commonly from 
overwatering. Water fills up the soil pores that 
normally hold air, so no oxygen is available 
to the roots. This causes the roots to die, 
which reduces the root area available for water 
uptake and causes the plant to wilt.
■  Ozone pollution causes mottling or yel­
lowing of leaves, especially on the upper leaf 
surfaces.
■  Peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN) pollution
is common in urban areas. Damage due to 
exposure to PAN appears as silvery white or 
brown spots on the undersides of leaves.
■  Sulfur dioxide pollution may cause leaves 
to yellow or brown in between the veins. Sul­
fur dioxide also combines with moisture in 
the air to form acid rain. While the exact 
effect of acid rain on plants isn't known, it
can lower the soil pH and cause nutrient imbal­
ance symptoms.
How to Prevent
Putting the right plant into the right spot 
will go a long way in preventing environmen­
tal problems. Learn about a plant before you 
buy it. and make sure you have an appropriate 
site for it. For example, no matter how much 
care and love you give them, roses will seldom 
perform well in a heavily shaded yard. Figure 
out what growing conditions your yard has to 
offer, and then choose from the range of plants 
that are best adapted to that site. If air pollu­
tion is a problem, look for resistant species or 
cultivars.
Good garden maintenance also helps to 
keep plants healthy. During dry spells, water 
plants deeply and evenly. Observe your plants 
closely and test the soil every few years. Most 
organic fertilizers, and especially compost, 
supply a wide spectrum of plant nutrients.
How to Control
Once you identify the cause, “curing" an 
environmental problem may be fairly simple. 
If the soil is dry. soak the ground slowly and 
deeply to restore soil moisture. A 5- to lOminute 
blast from a hose may make the top of the soil 
look wet. but it’s probably still dry a few inches 
below the surface. A soil that is too wet. depriv­
ing plant roots of oxygen, is more difficult to 
fix. The best solution is to remove damaged 
plants and replace them with plants that are 
better adapted to wet soil.
If you think your plants have a nutrient 
imbalance, consider having the leaves analyzed. 
These tests may be available from your local 
extension agent or a private laboratory. If symp­
toms are from a nutrient imbalance, there 
may not be sufficient time to add soil nutri­
ents and for plants to take them up before the 
growing season ends and the plant dies. In 
such cases you can spray your plant with a

DISORDERS ■ 
357
nutrient solution, which will be taken in through 
the plants* leaves. Organic fertilizers such as 
fish emulsion and seaweed extract can be 
applied in this manner, but make sure to fol­
low directions to avoid burning your plants 
leaves with too concentrated a solution. You 
can also use well-diluted compost tea in this 
way. For directions on making this tea see 
page 427.
Temperature extremes and air pollution 
can’t be controlled. On woody plants, pruning 
off damaged growth and providing extra fertil­
izer and water may help the plant recover 
from damage. If too much sun or shade seems 
to be the problem, try moving the affected 
plant to a different light level, if possible.
Cultural Problems
Cultural problems are the things people 
and other animals do that injure plants. With 
a little care and common sense on your part, 
most of these problems are easy to avoid.
What They Are
People can damage plants in a variety of 
ways. Almost anything that you do in the garden, 
if you do it the wrong way or at the wrong 
time, can cause problems for your plants. Some 
insect controls, such as soaps and oil sprays, 
can damage plants if you apply them at the 
wrong time.
Other types of damage include the infa­
mous "lawnmoweritis’’ and string trimmer in­
jury. When these machines bump into trees, 
they cause unsightly wounds that are perfect 
entrance points for disease organisms and bor­
ing insects. Trees on construction sites are 
highly prone to being hit by equipment or to 
suffer root damage due to soil compaction. 
Tight plant labels and staking wires may cut 
into the bark of your tree and interrupt the 
flow of water and nutrients.
Poor cultural practices can make plants 
more susceptible to environmental problems.
Fertilizing at the wrong time of year, for 
example, can encourage plants to produce 
tender growth that is easily damaged by cold 
temperatures. Cultivating too close to plants 
may damage their root systems, reducing their 
water uptake.
Animals also cause their share of plant 
damage. Birds such as sapsuckers can peck 
holes into bark, creating entry sites for dis­
eases and insects. Tender plant crowns, roots, 
and bark make tasty winter fare for hungry 
deer, mice, and rabbits.
VM>at You See
Cultural problems produce a wide range 
of symptoms, so it may be difficult to deter­
mine the exact cause. Observe the plant closely, 
though, and the problem may become apparent. 
Look for wounds in the stems, stakes or plant 
labels that are too tight, or teeth marks caused 
by animals.
Keeping complete garden records may 
also help you make a diagnosis. If a plant’s 
leaves suddenly become distorted or damaged, 
looking at your records may help you realize 
that you applied some form of pest control 
under the wrong conditions. For example, 
you might have applied bordeaux mix when 
the weather was too cool and damp, which 
would account for the discolored patches on 
your apples.
How to Prei'ent
In general, the best way to avoid cultural 
problems is to be a perfect gardener. Then 
you would never bump your tree with a lawn 
mower, fertilize too late in the season, or culti­
vate too deeply. Obviously, few gardeners 
achieve this level of expertise. The garden is a 
constantly changing environment, reflecting 
the varying weather conditions and the changes 
in the plants themselves. If. however, you keep 
records of what you do in the garden and how 
the plants respond, you’ll gradually learn what

358 
■ 
DISEASES
works best for your plants and conditions.
There are also some active steps that you 
can take to avoid cultural problems. To reduce 
the chances of hitting a tree with a mower or 
trimmer, plant a groundcover or apply mulch 
around the base of the tree so you won’t have 
to trim close to the trunk. During the winter, 
though, pull the mulch away from the base of 
the tree: otherwise, the mulch will provide a 
great place for mice to live and feed on the 
bark and roots.
Remember to remove labels and to check 
wrapped or staked trees frequently, loosening 
the ties, if necessary. Whenever possible, pro­
tect trees from construction damage by rop­
ing off a large area around them, so trucks 
won’t compact the soil around the roots or hit 
the tree.
How to Control
Cultural problems are often difficult to 
“cure.” You won’t know that something went 
wrong until the damage shows up. For example, 
if you cultivate too close to plants, you won't 
know that the roots were severely damaged 
until the plants start to wilt.
In most cases plants can outgrow damage 
caused by a cultural problem if it is not too 
severe. With some special care, such as care­
ful fertilization and extra water, your plant 
will often recover and continue to grow. If you 
cause a wound on a tree, you can smooth out 
the edges to help it close faster; for instruc­
tions, see the illustration "Treating tree wounds ’ 
on page 235.
Disease Prevention 
and Control
Plant diseases tend to be minor problems 
in organic gardens. Techniques such as 
interplanting, following good sanitation
practices, and choosing resistant cultivars tend 
to minimize the incidence and spread of dis­
eases. While there aren’t many organically ac­
ceptable sprays or dusts for controlling disease, 
observant gardeners can catch problems early 
and treat them with less-toxic controls.
There are some plants that seem to be 
disease-prone, no matter how carefully you 
grow them. For example, many gardeners have 
problems with powdery mildew on garden 
phlox (Phloxpaniculata). In many cases those 
plants just aren’t well-adapted to the climate 
or growing conditions in a given area. The 
answer is to not plant those plants or to search 
for disease-resistant substitutes. For example, 
P. maculata is a good mildew-resistant alterna­
tive to garden phlox.
Preventing disease problems is largely a 
matter of common sense. Before buying'a 
plant, learn about its potential problems and 
avoid those plants that are very disease- 
susceptible. Also, choose plants that are well- 
adapted to your growing conditions, and care 
for them properly to keep them vigorous and 
healthy. Be aware of the problems that tend to 
attack each plant and take the appropriate 
precautions to avoid a disease outbreak.
Most important, observe plants frequently. 
Early detection is the key to easy and effective 
disease control. If you catch a disease early 
on, a simple control such as handpicking the 
infected part may eliminate the problem. A 
few days of undisturbed development, however, 
may be all that disease needs to threaten the 
life of your plants. And as it is weakened by 
the disease, the infected plant becomes more 
susceptible toother problems. Plants with root 
rot, for instance, are more likely to suffer from 
winter cold injury and drought damage than 
healthy plants. And plants damaged by air 
pollution become more susceptible to insect 
attack. By keeping a watchful eye on your 
plants, you can spot diseases before they get 
out of hand.

DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL ■ 
359
Identifying Disease Problems
Suppose you wander out into your gar­
den on a summer morning and you notice 
some spots on the tomato leaves. What should 
you do? Nothing—until you determine what 
caused the spots.
To determine what is causing the injury, 
you need to look closely at the plant for more 
information. While some diseases may only 
cause a single symptom, such as leaf spots, 
many produce more than one indication of 
their presence. Finding these other clues can 
help you identify the problem quickly and 
accurately. And by being aware of common 
symptoms and signs of diseases, you'll be able 
to spot problems early on, before they get out 
of hand.
Putting Together a Diagnosis
Diagnosing a plant problem is easier if 
you have a systematic approach. Follow these
steps.
1. Identify the plant that is afflicted. If 
you use reference books to key out symptoms 
and signs, you may be on a wild goose chase if 
you haven’t figured out what plant is affected. 
Also, some control products, such as horticul­
tural oil, can injure plant foliage of certain 
plant species. If you haven't identified the 
plant, you won’t know whether you’re using 
the appropriate control.
2. Observe the symptoms and signs. When 
making a diagnosis, don't be too quick to 
assume the problem is a disease. For example, 
if your geranium leaves are covered with yel­
low spots, they may be suffering from a bacte­
rial or fungal disease. But if you observe the 
leaves closely and find webbing and tiny black 
specks on the leaves as well, the plants are 
infested with spider mites. See “Pest Patrol 
Checklist” on page 9 for a detailed rundown 
of how to examine your plants.
3. If you know what diseases are very
common in your area, decide whether the 
symptoms and signs you see are typical of one 
of those common problems. For example, you 
may know that powdery mildew on lilacs, 
scab on apples, black spot on roses, and leaf 
spot on tomatoes generally appear every year 
in your area. Other diseases may appear only 
sporadically in your area.
4. If the problem isn’t one of those ever­
present diseases, you'll have to do some 
research. You'll find information on common 
diseases in the “Disease Symptom Guide" be­
ginning on page 370. You can also check to 
see if your plant is listed in the “Problem- 
Solving Plant Guide” beginning on page II.
5. Once you're familiar with the symp­
toms caused by different disease organisms, 
you may not need to make a pinpoint diagno­
sis in order to know what to do. For example, 
if you see that plants in one part of a perennial 
bed are Hying off and have blackened, soggy 
roots, you won’t need to identify the specific 
organism causing the problem. You’ll know 
that you should improve drainage in that part 
of the bed to make the environment less favor­
able for fungi and bacteria that cause root rot.
6. If you do want to make a specific 
diagnosis, keep in mind that disease symp­
toms can change as the disease progresses and 
that secondary symptoms can mask the origi­
nal problem. Primary symptoms are those symp­
toms produced at the point where infection 
occurred. These are usually the most obvious 
clues for identifying a disease. Secondary symp­
toms are produced elsewhere on the plant, 
away from the original infection site. Tomatoes, 
for instance, commonly suffer from leaf spot 
disease. The spotted leaves are the primary 
symptom of disease, but as the disease pro­
gresses, the leaves may yellow and drop, expos­
ing the fruit to intense sunlight. The resulting 
sunscald on the fruit is a secondary symptom.
With most root diseases, you probably 
will notice secondary symptoms first. If some

360 
■ 
DISEASES
of your cabbage plants are wilting (a second­
ary symptom), dig one up and inspect its roots. 
Are the roots white and well-formed, or are 
they a gnarled mass (the primary symptom), 
indicating club root disease? Wilting straw­
berry plants may have damaged roots, caused 
by black root rot (producing darkened roots) 
or red stele (with no side roots and a red core 
evident when a root is slit lengthwise).
7. 
If you have a serious disease problem 
in your garden that you cannot diagnose, you 
may want to turn to private consultants or to 
government sources, such as the Cooperative 
Extension Service, for help. Your local exten­
sion agent may immediately recognize the prob­
lem. If not, he or she can serve as a contact 
with specialists from your state university.
All the inform ation you’ve gathered — 
sym ptom s, signs, w eather, soil, disease 
distribution, and so on —will be useful in help­
ing others pinpoint your plants' problem. The 
more detailed and the more accurate your 
information, the more reliable the diagnosis 
will be.
You also may be requested to send a 
sample of the diseased plant or plant part. 
Choose representative diseased samples: Don’t 
send leaves that have been dead for a long 
time or those that are so affected that they are 
unrecognizable. Succulent plant parts such as 
leaves or young shoots shipped in sealed plas­
tic bags tend to rot. Instead, wrap them in 
several layers of newspaper, which also will 
prevent crushing. Dry or woody plant mate­
rial ships well in plastic bags. If possible, send 
the entire plant, and also include a specimen 
of a healthy plant or part of a plant of the 
same species and cultivar. Pack specimens 
for shipping in a sturdy container, such as a 
cardboard box or mailing tube, to prevent 
crushing.
Plant Detective Kit
W
hen you're diagnosing plant problems, 
it's helpful to assemble as much infor­
mation a s you can. You can compare sam ­
ples and your notes to reference texts or 
show them to your extension agent if you 
can't key out the problem yourself. When you 
go out to the garden, keep handy a small 
magnifying glass and small bags or vials for 
specimens. Also carry a notebook to record 
what symptoms occur and when. These notes 
may help in the diagnosis of the problem at 
hand and also serve as a quick reference in 
the future.
A rain gauge and a thermometer that 
registers minimum and maximum tempera­
tures can also provide data that will be useful 
in making a diagnosis. Position the rain gauge
and thermometer at a site similar to that 
experienced by your plants. To get the most 
accurate temperature reading, shield the ther­
mometer from the direct rays of the sun; the 
north side of a pole is a good location.
General weather conditions can play a 
major role in determining which diseases affect 
your plants. Prolonged rainy, cool weather, 
for example, promotes late blight of potatoes. 
Powdery mildew, on the other hand, is favored 
by dry weather, especially when days are hot 
and nights are cool. Remember that weather 
not only influences the development of infec­
tious diseases, but can itself lead to diseased 
conditions. Cold injury, for example, causes 
water-soaked splotches on young leaves or 
cracks in stems.

DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL 
■ 
361
Keeping Disease Out
One of the best ways to avoid the worry 
of having to diagnose and treat a disease prob­
lem is to keep disease-causing organisms out 
of your yard and garden. If you're aware of 
how disease organisms can enter your yard or 
garden, you'll know how to keep them out.
Choose clean seeds. Several kinds of dis­
ease organisms, including those that cause an­
thracnose and bacterial blight ..can overwinter 
on seeds. Buy seeds from reputable companies 
to minimize your chances of getting infected 
seed. If you choose to save home-grown seed, 
save seed only from healthy plants and pods, 
and store the seeds in a cool, dry place.
Select clean plants. Obviously, buying 
disease-free plants is a key part of excluding 
disease from your garden. Check plants care­
fully before you buy them. If you order plants 
through a catalog, inspect them as soon as 
you receive them in the mail. Look for stunted 
growth, cracked stems, discolored leaves, or 
other unusual signs. Inspect the roots and 
crowns of bare-root plants. Don't buy those 
with disease symptoms, such as wartlike swell­
ings indicative of crown gall. Select bulbs and 
tubers that appear healthy and undamaged. 
Avoid any that are moldy, soft, or bruised. If 
you have doubts about the health of a new 
plant, grow it in isolation from related plants 
until you are sure it is healthy.
Some diseases, such as viral diseases that 
commonly attack small fruits, may not show 
symptoms. Buy from reputable nurseries to 
get “clean" plants. Commercial nurseries main­
tain stock plants in special structures and sell 
certified virus-free plants propagated from those 
protected plants.
Quarantine new arrivals. Even plants that 
look healthy can harbor unseen pests and 
disease pathogens. If you suspect that a new 
plant might be carrying a pest or disease, keep 
it separated from your other plants for a while. 
Observe the plant closely for a few days or 
weeks, depending on how careful you want to
be. If any problems do occur, you can easily 
control the problem or destroy the plant.
Also think about quarantines if you plan 
to import or export plants from the United 
States. In 1912, the Federal Plant Quarantine 
Act was passed to prevent the introduction of 
foreign pathogens into the United States. Fed­
eral plant quarantine laws limit the importa­
tion of plants, plant products (even seeds), 
and soil from other countries. Some states 
have their own, more restrictive, exclusions. 
Before you bring any plant into this country, 
check with the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) and your state department of agricul­
ture to see if any restrictions apply. Write to 
USDA/APHIS/PP&Q, Federal Center Building. 
Hyattsville. MD 20782, for information.
Discouraging Disease
Avoiding disease outbreaks in the garden 
requires a two-pronged approach: You'll want 
to optimize growing conditions for each plant 
while minimizing the growth of pathogens.
Protidittg Good Growing Conditions
A plant growing under good conditions is 
more likely to resist disease and to survive in 
spite of disease than one growing under poor 
conditions. Learn the needs of your individ­
ual plants in terms of light, water, fertility, and 
soil pH, and provide the combination that is 
best for each plant.
Fit plant to place. While you cannot do 
anything to change your local climate, you 
can amend the soil, provide water and fertility, 
and select microclimates around your prop­
erty to suit the needs of individual plants. 
Many garden plants are exotics, native to places 
where conditions are different from your garden. 
Cabbages originated along the chalky coast 
of England, tomatoes are indigenous to sub­
tropical regions of western South America, 
and tulips are native to the dry steppes of 
Turkestan. Yet these three plants, along with 
other plants from various corners of the world,

362 
■ 
DISEASES
are commonly grown together on the same 
plot of land in gardens across the country. 
Take time to learn about the light, soil, and 
other site requirements of plants, especially 
exotics, and try to find the best match of plant 
and site on your property.
Time garden tasks. Optimizing growing 
conditions for a plant is not only a question of 
what to do, but of when to do it. Com or bean 
seeds planted before the soil has warmed suf­
ficiently do not germinate rapidly and are 
susceptible to damping-off. Tomatoes set out 
too early in the spring may succumb to frost 
or show phosphorus deficiency until their roots 
become active.
Trees and shrubs that are fertilized too 
late in summer, or overfertilized with nitrogen 
at any time, do not harden off with the ap­
proach of cold weather in autumn. Pruning or 
overwatering too late in the summer can also 
cause a late flush of succulent growth. In the 
winter, insufficiently hardened plants may expe­
rience cold damage and subsequent disease 
problems, such as Cytospora canker, also known 
as Valsa canker, of peach trees.
To optimize growing conditions for your 
plants, consider all your cultural practices 
together. For example, if you plan to prune off 
a large amount of winterkilled wood from a 
tree, don't fertilize that tree before you prune. 
Pruning stimulates new growth, and the com­
bination of pruning and fertilization that sea­
son will result in overly lush growth.
M inim izing Disease Development
Making your garden an unfavorable place 
for pathogens is an important way to reduce 
the chances of disease outbreaks. Infectious 
diseases are not a problem unless the environ­
ment is suitable for the pathogen to infect, 
grow, and multiply in or on susceptible plants.
Water wisely. Water is especially impor­
tant in the development of bacterial and fun­
gal diseases. Many soilborne fungal diseases 
become a problem in soils that are too wet.
The fungi thrive in waterlogged conditions 
and roots are damaged by saturation, render­
ing them more susceptible to infection. If you 
have wet soils, put in a drainage system, dig 
ditches to carry away excess water, or plant in 
raised beds to reduce problems with soilborne 
diseases, such as root rots and damping-off. 
Avoid overwatering, and when you do water, 
keep excess water from flooding around the 
trunks of woody plants.
How you water can be as important as 
how much you water. One advantage of drip 
irrigation over sprinklers is that it doesn’t wet 
foliage. Thus, relative humidity is lower and 
fungal spores are less apt to germinate because 
there is no water on the leaves. There is also 
no splashing water to spread fungi and bacte­
ria within or between plants. If you do water 
your plants by sprinkling, water early in the 
day, when the warming sun will dry the leaves 
quickly. (Leaves also dry quickly with after­
noon watering, but much water may be wasted 
through evaporation.)
Most fungi and bacteria that attack the 
branches, fruit, and flowers of plants thrive in 
high humidity. Except for plants that need 
humid conditions, grow your outdoor plants 
where gentle breezes rapidly dry leaves and 
remove humid air hovering near them. Inside 
your home, especially in winter, the air is too 
dry for most aboveground diseases to develop. 
However, a home greenhouse can have the 
humid conditions that set the stage for such 
diseases as Botrytis on greenhouse geraniums. 
Use fans and vents to moderate humidity lev­
els in greenhouses.
Allow for air circulation. Good air cir­
culation will go a long way in discouraging 
disease development. Overcrowded plants do 
not dry rapidly after rain or watering; the 
resulting high humidity can encourage disease. 
Don’t sow seeds too densely, and thin emerged 
plants to an adequate spacing. Thin some 
stems from large clumps of multistemmed 
perennials, such as phlox and bee balm, to

DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL ■ 
363
allow more air flow through the plants. Also, 
avoid dense weed growth that can cause the 
air to stagnate around your plants.
Proper pruning will also encourage good 
air circulation. Train young trees and shrubs 
to an open framework so air can easily circu­
late around the branches. Use mostly thinning 
cuts—pruning branches back either to ground 
level or to a branch collar—to avoid bushy 
regrowth after pruning.
Adjust soil pH. Soil acidity can have a 
dramatic effect on plant diseases. You can 
control certain diseases merely by adjusting 
soil pH. The fungus that causes club root, a 
serious disease of cabbage family crops, can 
survive for years in the soil, even in the absence 
of a host plant. However, it thrives only in 
acidic soils; you can eliminate club root prob­
lems by adjusting soil pH to at least 7.2.
Other diseases can be checked by mak­
ing your soil more acidic. Scab is most destruc­
tive in soils with pH higher than 5.7. To avoid 
scab, do not plant potatoes in soil that has been 
recently limed, and adjust soil pH, if necessary, 
to below 5.7. Cotton root rot, which is preva­
lent in the Southwest and attacks more than 
1,700 plant species, favors a soil pH higher than 
8.0. One part of the multifaceted approach 
needed to control this disease is to acidify 
the soil.
Balance soil fertility. Plants suffering from 
nutrient deficiencies are weakened and are 
likely candidates for disease problems. In some 
cases, nutrient excesses can also encourage 
disease. High levels of nitrogen, for example, 
promote succulent plant growth, increasing sus­
ceptibility of pears to fire blight as well as in­
creasing the incidence of viruses, rust, powdery 
mildew, and Verticillium wilt on some plants.
Rather than trying to adjust specific nutri­
ents to ward off disease, the best approach is 
to strive for balanced fertility. Work toward 
this by maintaining an abundant supply of 
organic matter, such as compost, in your soil 
and by applying additional fertilizers accord­
ing to the needs of your plants, as indicated by 
plant growth or soil tests. For more informa­
tion on managing soils, see “Cultural Con­
trols” on page 410.
Resort to resistance. Planting disease- 
resistant species and cultivars also reduces 
the chances of disease problems. These spe­
cial plants can occur naturally, appearing in 
wild populations or among cultivated plants. 
Breeders also induce mutations in plants, hop­
ing that the mutations prove desirable. Or. 
using the techniques of genetic engineering, 
researchers can insert specific genes into desired 
plant cells or fuse the contents of different 
plant cells. See “Resistance” on page 412 for a 
complete discussion of types of resistant plants 
and how to use them in your garden.
Growing resistant plants does have its 
limitations in controlling disease. First of all, 
plants may not have been developed or found 
that are resistant to certain diseases. Also, 
disease-resistant cultivars may not have all the 
other attributes you want in your plants. In 
the case of tomatoes, for example, does the 
fruit taste good? Do you want a “meaty” tomato 
for canning, or a juicy one for fresh eating? 
There's no point in growing a plant that doesn't 
fit your needs, just because it is disease-resistant.
Be sure you need the type of resistance 
that the cultivar you select offers. For instance, 
it's not necessary to plant a Verticillium-resistant 
tomato cultivar if your soil is not infested with 
Verticillium fungi.
Stopping the Spread of Disease
At some point, despite your best efforts, 
disease problems will crop up in your garden. 
Don't despair—there are many easy things 
you can do to avoid a widespread disease 
outbreak.
Breaking the Cycle
In most parts of North America, gardens 
are still and seemingly lifeless during the winter. 
However, many disease organisms are present

364 
■ 
DISEASES
beneath that quiet surface, overwintering in 
dead plant tissue or in the soil. If you remove 
or destroy the pathogens overwintering sites, 
you can lessen the chances of new disease 
outbreaks in the following growing season. 
For example, the bacteria that cause fire blight 
of pear survive the winter in sunken lesions, 
called cankers, on the branches. By inspect­
ing your pear trees carefully, pruning off all 
cankers, and destroying the diseased prunings, 
you can eliminate bacteria that would have 
become active in spring and spread disease. 
Apple scab fungi, on the other hand, survive 
on dead apple leaves until a new growing sea­
son begins: by gathering up and destroying 
these old leaves, you remove a source of infec­
tion for the coming season.
Crop rotation also helps interrupt patho­
gen life cycles, especially for those diseases 
that only attack certain types of hosts. For 
more details on how crop rotation can control 
disease, see “Rotate your crops" below.
Breaking the life cycles of some other 
disease organisms is less straightforward. For 
example, the spores that will cause next sea­
son's bacterial wilt of cucumbers survive in 
the digestive tracts of striped cucumber beetles. 
To limit the spread of the disease, you must 
diligently control the beetles.
Destroying Diseased Plants
Infected plant parts may themselves 
become a source for further infection. These 
secondary cycles, as they are called, often are 
important in intensifying the disease. Purposely 
destroying diseased plants or those suspected 
of harboring disease is a way to keep disease 
from spreading to healthy plants.
Removing and destroying diseased plants 
is often the only safe and practical way to deal 
with a disease outbreak. This process, also 
called rogueing out, is most commonly used 
on annuals, such as vegetables and bedding 
plants: in some cases, such as root rot, you 
may have to remove whole trees. While you
do lose part of your crop or floral display 
during the current season, you will then be 
aware of the problem and can take steps to 
prevent it in the future. For example, you 
could plant disease-resistant cultivars. improve 
soil drainage to discourage root rot organisms, 
or try preventive sprays of an organic fungi­
cide that keeps the disease organism from 
infecting plants.
Removing wild disease-prone plants grow­
ing in or around your garden is another way to 
reduce the spread of disease. Eliminating wild 
cherries, for example, should reduce popula­
tions of black knot fungi, which also infect 
cultivated plums. Many common weeds, includ­
ing ground cherries, catnip, milkweed, and 
pokeweed, provide overwintering sites for 
cucumber mosaic virus. Eliminating these hosts 
will reduce the chances of your cucumber 
and squash plants being infected by the virus.
Using Good Garden M anagement
Tilling the soil, seed-sowing, weeding, 
and fertilizing are examples of cultural prac­
tices associated with growing and caring for 
plants. You can discourage or eliminate many 
diseases by giving special attention to cultu­
ral practices. Any cultural practice you employ 
for disease control must, of course, fit into your 
scheme of gardening. On the other hand, you 
may want to change some of the ways in which 
you grow a plant to control a specific disease.
Keep the garden clean. One simple but 
effective method of disease control is to keep 
your garden area free of debris that could 
harbor pathogens. As you walk around your 
garden, carry a bag so you'll have a safe place 
to put any diseased material as soon as you 
spot it. As you harvest fruits and vegetables, 
remove and destroy any damaged ones that 
you see. Gather up old plants from the garden 
at the end of the season, along with any dead, 
dying, or diseased leaves.
Prune for disease control. One of many 
reasons for pruning plants is as a sanitation

DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL ■ 
365
measure to control diseases. As you look over 
your plants, cut off any leaves or stems that 
you suspect are diseased. This not only pre­
vents disease from spreading within the plant, 
but also checks the spread of disease to other 
plants. Pruning is useful in controlling such 
diseases as fire blight on pear and bud and 
twig blight of rhododendron. See "Pruning for 
Pest Control" on page 432 for specific instruc­
tions on how to prune diseased plant materials.
Destroy diseased material. You have sev­
eral options for disposing of diseased plant 
material; the best method varies according to 
the type of disease organism involved.
Viruses are very difficult to destroy. If 
you suspect that your plant is infected with a 
virus, bury the affected parts away from culti­
vated areas of garden, or place them in a 
sealed container and dispose of them with 
your household trash.
You can dispose of most other types of 
diseased materials in your compost pile. By 
composting them, you conserve organic matter 
and nutrients, which are recycled to nourish 
your plants. A newly made hot compost pile 
should heat up to at least 160°F a tempera­
ture that will kill most pathogenic nematodes, 
fungi, and bacteria. Make sure you put the 
diseased material near the center of the pile, 
where it will be exposed to the highest tem­
peratures. If you don’t have a hot compost 
pile, burn or bury the diseased material, or 
put it in a sealed container for disposal with 
your household trash.
Tilling is another way to clean up old 
plant material at season's end. Chopping and 
mixing plants into the soil subjects them to 
rapid attack by soil microorganisms. The old 
plant material then becomes humus, rather 
than remaining as a potential source of inocu­
lum for the next season.
Keep tools clean. Sanitation also involves 
cleaning tools and pots that come into con­
tact with plants. Soil clinging to trowels and 
shovels can carry disease organisms such as
Verticillium and damping-off fungi. Clean these 
tools after use, scraping off the soil (but not 
over garden beds) and then wiping them clean. 
Sweep potting benches clean after each use. 
Disease-causing organisms can also survive in 
old pots and seedling flats, so clean these 
containers thoroughly before use. then disin­
fect them by dipping them in a 10 percent 
bleach solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts water). 
Do not allow bleach solution to come into 
contact with plants.
Rotate your crops. Avoid the buildup of 
disease organisms by growing your crops in 
different parts of the garden each year. This 
practice, called crop rotation, is one of the 
best ways to reduce the chances of a disease 
outbreak. The premise is simple; Many gar­
den pests survive the winter and can reinfect a 
crop if it is grown in the same spot year after 
year. However, if the suitable host plant is 
absent, the pest starves.
Most pathogens tend to attack all the 
members of a given plant family. That's why 
it's helpful to learn which vegetable crops 
belong in the same family. You might be sur­
prised to learn that plants that seem very dif­
ferent, such as carrots and parsley, actually 
belong to the same family (Umbelliferae). Other 
common families include the nightshade fam­
ily (tomatoes, eggplants, and peppers), the 
cabbage family (with cabbage, broccoli, cau­
liflower, and brussels sprouts), and the legume 
family (including beans and peas). To learn 
how to plan an effective crop rotation program, 
see "Crop Rotation" on page 415.
Crop rotation is more effective in con­
trolling some diseases than others. Soilborne 
diseases are not very mobile, so you can con­
trol them more easily by crop rotation than 
you can aboveground diseases, which can send 
spores wafting across fa>m neighboring gardens. 
Crop rotation also is most useful in starving 
out a pathogen that attacks only one or a few 
species of plants. If a disease has many host 
species (such as the Verticillium wilt fungus.

566 
■ 
DISEASES
which can attack nearly 300 different species), 
crop rotation isn't a practical control.
As a cultural practice, crop rotation does 
more than control infectious diseases. It also 
helps control certain insect pests and is valu­
able for avoiding nutrient disorders. Growing 
different types of plants each year at a given 
location prevents the soil from being selec­
tively depleted of the nutrients utilized by one 
type of plant. Instead, a spectrum of nutrients 
is removed from the soil over time, which 
generally tends to maintain balanced fertility.
Control disease carriers. Because patho­
gens are so small, they cannot move very far 
under their own power. Many nematodes, for
example, only move a few inches from the site 
where they hatched. However, disease inocu­
lum can also spread by other methods, includ­
ing insect vectors, splashing or running water, 
wind, and bits of soil carried on boots and tools.
Many diseases can spread from one plant 
to the next only by means of a vector. A vector 
is an animal (usually an insect) that carries 
disease from one plant to the next. In such 
cases, if you can control the vector, the dis­
ease will not occur. Thus, one approach to 
controlling Dutch elm disease is to control 
the elm bark beetle, which spreads the dis­
ease from infected to healthy elms.
Insect vectors, such as elm bark beetles,
Cultivation
equipment
plants
2>
Seeds 
_
€5>
Insects
Pruning 
equipment
Diseases spread by a wide variety of means. Some carriers, such as 
wind and rain, are beyond the gardener's control. In many cases, 
though, you can directly reduce the spread of disease by excluding 
insects and animals, keeping gardening equipment clean, and 
avoiding infected seeds and transplants.

DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL ■ 
367
aphids that transmit virus diseases, and cucum­
ber beetles that spread bacterial wilt, require 
more thorough control if the objective is to 
prevent disease rather than merely to prevent 
insect damage. While feeding by a few aphids 
won’t produce much visible damage, a few 
feeding punctures from a virus-carrying aphid 
are enough to inoculate that plant. The virus 
will eventually spread throughout the plant, 
reducing yield and perhaps killing the plant.
Plant nurseries that maintain virus-free 
stock grow virus-susceptible plants in cages 
covered with fine mesh screen to keep insect 
vectors from feeding. You can keep insects 
away from valuable plants in your garden by 
covering them with floating row cover. If the 
plants are not self-pollinating, you must even­
tually uncover them to allow for insect polli­
nation. By then, though, the plants will be 
well-established and more resistant to infection.
Laying down reflective mulch, such as 
aluminum foil, around plants is an effective 
aphid deterrent. The reflection disorients the 
pests sufficiently to keep plants free from aphids 
and the diseases they transmit. Applying organic 
sprays or dusts to control insects may be use­
ful in avoiding some insect-transmitted diseases, 
but does not always control the insect suffi­
ciently to prevent inoculation.
Remember that humans also can be vec­
tors of disease. You can carry crown gall from 
an infected plant to a healthy plant on a shovel 
you use for planting, or fire blight from one 
branch to the next on infected pruning shears. 
Your tomato plants could become infected 
with tobacco mosaic virus if you handle the 
plants after touching cigarettes or other tobacco 
products infected with tobacco mosaic virus.
Use temperature for disease control. You 
can control certain diseases by exposing plants 
or soil to high or low temperatures. In many 
cases, though, too much of a good thing can be 
fatal. so be sure you know the pros and cons of 
each method before treating your whole crop.
The most common use of temperature 
for disease control is cold storage. In general, 
storing harvested crops at low temperatures 
slows the growth of possible pathogens. The 
optimum storage temperature, however, var­
ies from crop to crop. Apples and many other 
harvested fruit, root, and leafy crops store 
best at temperatures as close to freezing as 
possible. The flavor of bananas and avocados, 
however, are ruined at such low temperatures. 
Similarly, winter squash, pumpkins, and sweet 
potatoes keep best at 50°-60°E
Using high temperatures to control dis­
ease on living plants is a tricky proposition, 
because there is always the chance of damag­
ing or killing the plant in the process. Heat 
has been used to rid plants of systemic virus 
diseases, but such treatments are probably 
unfeasible for backyard gardeners. Plants may 
be dipped in hot water for a few minutes up to 
many hours, the temperature and the timing 
depending on the plant and the virus. Or, 
plants may be grown at 95°-110°F for a period 
of weeks or months. These treatments may 
damage the plants, but the ones that survive 
are used commercially to provide disease-free 
material for propagation.
Heat-treatment of seeds and bulbs is more 
common, because these structures are more 
tolerant of high temperatures. Hot-water dips 
for seeds were developed at the end of the 
1800s and are still used today for some com­
mercial seeds. Temperature and timing are 
critical and vary depending on the type of 
plant. See page 422 for full instructions on 
this technique.
Treating soil with high temperatures is 
often very effective for controlling soilborne 
diseases, such as root rots and damping-off. 
You can heat potting soil in the oven and use 
the sun’s heat to raise temperatures in garden 
soil, a process called solarization. You'll find 
directions for heat-treating soil in "Pathogen- 
Free Potting Soil" on page 413.

368 
■ 
DISEASES
Attacking Disease Problems
An important decision you must make is 
whether or not controlling a specific disease 
problem in your garden is worth the effort, 
time, expense, and possible hazards. Spraying 
lime-sulfur to control mildew, for example, 
may burn your plants’ leaves in hot weather. 
Over time, your experience will help you pro­
ject how severe a problem will become later 
if you don't take steps to control it.
Controlling certain diseases may not be 
worthwhile toward the end of the growing 
season. For example, potatoes grown in the 
North can be attacked by late blight in Sep­
tember and suffer no reduction in yield, because 
the leaves are ceasing to function anyway. 
This same severity of blight infection in June, 
however, could result in no potatoes at all.
In other cases, damage from certain dis­
eases is mostly cosmetic. Lilacs covered with 
powdery mildew in late summer may look 
unsightly, but the disease usually does the 
plants little harm. Cosmetic damage affects 
you rather than the plant, so you must weigh 
your tolerance for the unsightliness against 
the costs in time, money, and risk associated 
with various controls.
The nature of a particular disease can 
help you predict whether control is neces­
sary; hence the importance of disease identi­
fication. Noninfectious diseases do not spread 
from one plant to the next. For instance, leaf 
yellowing due to iron deficiency on an azalea 
planted in alkaline soil will not spread to nearby 
healthy azaleas planted in acidic soil. While 
you should take steps to revitalize the affected 
plants, you won’t have to do anything to pro­
tect the healthy plants.
There are probably some diseases that 
are so common in your area that you will 
know you can expect them (although sea­
sonal weather variations will determine its 
severity each year). Apple scab reliably appears 
on susceptible cultivars of apples in the 
Northeast, and powdery mildew just as relia­
bly appears on many plants on the West Coast 
each summer. It’s good practice to assume 
you should take preventive measures against 
these diseases every season.
Choosing a Control
When disease threatens or strikes, you 
usually have a few options available for con­
trolling the disease. In most cases, it is advis­
able not to limit yourself to a single approach 
for best results.
Keep a close eye on your plants when you 
implement disease-control measures, so that 
you can note their effectiveness. Also take 
note of w eather conditions and cultural 
practices, such as fertilization and watering, 
because these factors can influence the effec­
tiveness of many control measures. Don’t trust 
your memory for all these details! Keep writ­
ten records of disease incidence, control 
measures, and growing conditions.
Biological controls. One approach to con- 
trolling many infectious diseases is to use 
“friendly” microorganisms to fight off disease- 
producing organisms. This is known as bio­
logical control.
One approach in biological control is to 
make the pathogens sick. Bacteriophages, 
which are viruses that infect bacteria, have 
been used experimentally to infect and weaken 
the bacteria that cause bacterial wilt of toma­
toes and fire blight on pears.
Beneficial fungi also could be used to 
attack or inhibit the growth of fungi that cause 
plant disease. Some practical success has been 
made in this direction, not by inoculating soils 
with these beneficial fungi, but by providing 
soil amendments that foster their growth. 
Generally, if you grow plants in well-drained 
soils and amend the soil annually with good- 
quality compost or other organic materials, 
your soil will have high populations of benefi­
cial bacteria and fungi.
In some cases, inoculating a plant with 
one microorganism protects the plant from

DISEASE PREVENTION AND CONTROL 
■ 
369
attack by another microorganism. The micro­
organisms used for this technique either don’t 
cause disease or cause only mild symptoms in 
the treated plant. For example, chestnut blight 
has been successfully controlled in Europe by 
deliberately inoculating trees with blight fun­
gus that has been weakened by a virus. Trees 
infected with the weakened fungus are resistant 
to infection by the healthy fungus.
One commercial product that makes use 
of “friendly” microorganisms to fight disease 
is Galltrol-A. Dipping tree roots in Galltrol-A, 
which contains the nonpathogenic bacterium 
Agrobacterium radiobacter, can control crown 
gall disease.
Research has shown that, at least indirectly, 
adding compost to soil also can help in the 
fight against disease. By raising the level of 
organic matter, compost encourages large pop­
ulations of beneficial, disease-suppressing 
organisms in the soil. In fact, turning any kind 
of organic matter, such as shredded leaves or a 
cover crop, into the soil can reduce the popu­
lations of nematodes and other pathogens.
Organic sprays and dusts. Contrary to 
popular belief, most sprays and dusts for plant 
diseases cannot “cure” an infected plant. 
Rather, natural fungicides and bactericides 
act to provide protection against further dis­
ease infection. Most of these products form a 
coating around plant parts, inhibiting the ger­
mination of fungal spores, or killing germi­
nated spores or bacteria before they invade 
the plant. This means that early treatment is 
critical to successfully prevent further infec­
tion. Seriously infected plants may not benefit 
from a chemical application.
Most organic sprays and dusts available 
to control plant diseases are fungicides. These 
may act either to cure or to protect a plant 
from disease. Most fungicides used on grow­
ing plants are protectants, not curatives. Fun­
gicides also may be used as disinfectants to 
kill fungal hyphae or spores on plant tubers, 
seeds, bulbs, or other parts used in propagation.
Sulfur, lime-sulfur, and bordeaux mix are 
acceptable for use as fungicides in organic 
gardens. They can be applied in different 
formulations. These compounds are caustic 
and have the potential to harm nontarget organ­
isms such as insects, animals, humans, benefi­
cial fungi, even the plant that you are trying to 
protect. Use them with caution and strictly 
according to directions on the label.
Sulfur does not kill fungal spores, but 
instead forms a protective layer that inhibits 
spore germination. A severe limitation to the 
use of sulfur is the foliar damage it causes in 
hot weather. Plants such as tomatoes, grapes, 
and melons are especially sensitive to sulfur 
damage under a wide range of conditions.
Lime-sulfur prevents spore growth and 
can also kill recently germinated spores. Lime- 
sulfur is useful against such diseases as apple 
scab, brown rot on peaches, and powdery 
mildews. This compound is more toxic to plants 
than plain sulfur, so use it with caution. Lime- 
sulfur is often used as a dormant spray, when 
there is less chance of damaging the plant.
Copper-based com pounds inhibit the 
growth of fungal spores and also are some­
what effective against bacteria. Copper sul­
fate can be toxic to plants, so it is often com­
bined with water and lime to produce a 
compound called bordeaux mix. The lime is 
reduces the chances of the copper burning 
the plant leaves. Even so, bordeaux can cause 
damage such as russeting of apples, delayed 
fruit set of tomatoes, and yellowing and drop­
ping of rose leaves. This damage is most likely 
during cool, overcast weather when the spray 
dries slowly on the plant.
A few sprays that you can make yourself 
are effective against some diseases. Baking 
soda sprays can prevent damage from black 
spot on roses. And some gardeners use garlic 
sprays to treat a range of disease problems.
To learn more about specific organic sprays 
and dusts, see “Organic Sprays and Dusts” 
beginning on page 463.

DISEASE 
SYMPTOM GUIDE
Scientists who study plant diseases separate 
the visible characteristics of disease into two 
categories: symptoms and signs. A symptom 
is a plant’s response to a disease-causing organ­
ism or condition. Two common disease symp­
toms are changes in plant color and wilting. 
Disease symptoms usually result from death of 
cells, inhibited cell development, or overstim­
ulation of cell development.
A sign of an infectious disease is the 
disease-causing organism itself or its products 
(such as spores). Examples of signs produced 
by fungi include the white powdery spores of 
mildew, the black film of fungal strands on 
leaves with sooty mold, and the galls on cedar 
trees produced by cedar-apple rust. One com­
mon sign of bacteria is slimy ooze that often 
has a foul odor.
Diseased plants may show both symp­
toms and signs. Lilacs infected with powdery 
mildew may have curled leaves (a symptom), 
but even more obvious is the powdery white 
coating of fungal spores (a sign).
While it's not critical for you to know the 
technical difference between a symptom and 
a sign, it is helpful to know the terms used to 
describe common symptoms and signs of 
disease. If you suspect your plant is diseased, 
study its symptoms, and then review the symp­
tom descriptions listed on the following pages.
Once you match your plant's symptoms 
to one of the symptom descriptions and/or 
photographs, read the corresponding discus­
sion to learn more about the disease, includ­
ing the type of problem , other common 
symptoms, plants affected, and prevention and 
control measures.
The disease guide includes photographs 
and discussions of common plant diseases and 
disorders. They are organized by symptoms.
according to the plant parts affected: leaves; 
flowers and fruit; stems and roots; or whole 
plants. The symptom categories, and the pages 
on which you'll find descriptions of diseases 
that cause those symptoms, are as follows:
Leaf Symptoms
■ Leaves with spots. Pages 371-76.
■ Leaves yellow or discolored. Pages 
376-81.
■ Leaves with white, gray, or black 
patches. Pages 381-82.
■ Leaves curled or distorted. Pages 
382-83.
■ Leaves wilted. Pages 383-85.
Flower and Fruit Symptoms
■ Rowers discolored. Pages 385-86.
■ Fruit with spots. Pages 386-87.
■ Fruit with off-color patches. Pages 
387-88.
■ Fruit with powdery white coating. 
Pages 388-89.
■ Fruit rotted or deformed. Pages 389-91.
Stem and Root Symptoms
■ Stems with cracks or holes. Pages 
391-92.
■ Stems discolored. Pages 392-93.
■ Stem tips stunted. Page 394.
■ Stem tips die back. Pages 394-96.
■ Stems entangled with orange strings. 
Pages 396-97.
■ Stems with clusters of evergreen leaves. 
Page 397,
3 7 0

LEAF SYMPTOMS 
■ 
371
■ Stems with swollen growths. Pages
398-99.
■ Roots with swollen growths. Pages
399-400
■ Roots die back. Pages 400-401.
■ Tubers discolored or rotted. Pages 
401-2.
W hole Plant Sym ptom s
■ Seedlings die. Pages 402-3.
■ Plants stunted. Page 403.
■ Plants fall over. Page 403.
Leaf Symptoms: 
Leaves with Spots
The death of leaf cclls can result in well- 
defined. circular spots. Spots can be of vari­
ous colors and may change colors as symptoms 
progress. In some cases, as in cherry leaf spot, 
the dead cells eventually fall out, leaving holes.
Anthracnose
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: On leaves, anthracnose dis­
eases generally appear first as small, irregular 
yellow or brown spots that darken as they age. 
These spots may also expand and join to cover 
the leaves. On vegetables, anthracnose dis­
eases can affect any part of the plant. See 
“Anthracnose*’ on page 386 for a discussion of 
anthracnose symptoms on fruit. On trees, infec­
tion can begin before the leaves appear, kill­
ing the tips of young twigs. More often, 
anthracnose fungi strike the young leaves, pro­
ducing brown spots and patches. Defoliation 
may occur, forcing the tree to produce a new 
set of leaves in the summer.
Plants Affected: Many kinds of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Vegetables such as 
beans, cucumbers, melons, peppers, and toma­
toes are particularly susceptible. Anthracnose- 
prone trees include dogwoods, maples, and 
sycamores.
Prevention and Control: Avoid an­
thracnose on vegetables by selecting resistant 
cultivars (when available), buying healthy 
transplants, planting in well-drained soil, and 
not touching plants when they're wet. Remove 
and destroy infected plants. Spraying with a 
coppcr-bascd fungicide may provide some 
protection.
On trees, prune out the dead wood and 
the water sprouts. Avoid drought stress by 
watering trees during dry spells and keeping 
the root zone mulched. Gather up and destroy 
infected leaves. A dormant spray of bordeaux 
mix may provide some control.
Apple Scab
Symptoms on apple
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Apple scab symptoms first 
appear on leaves as olive green spots that
Si mptorm on dogwood 
Symptoms on maple

372 
■ 
DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
gradually turn black. These spots may expand 
and run together, forming large blotches. Leaves 
may drop prematurely. The leaves may be 
deformed or smaller than normal. Brown or 
black spots may also appear on the fruit; for 
more details, see "Apple Scab" on page 387.
Plants Affected: Apples and crab apples.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Rake up and dispose of fallen leaves, 
which carry overwintering spores. Apple scab 
is most prevalent in areas with cool, moist 
summers because the spores spread rapidly in 
wet weather. In spring, regular copper, sulfur, 
or lime-sulfur sprays may prevent apple scab 
fungi from infecting young leaves and fruit, 
reducing damage and the chance of apple 
scab recurring later in the season.
Bacterial Spot
Symptom* on zinnia
Type of Problem: Bacterial.
Symptoms: Depending on the plant they 
attack, these bacteria will produce round, 
angular, or elongated discolorations on leaves. 
The spots are tiny at first but may spread and 
join to cover whole leaves. The spots are usu­
ally brown and are sometimes surrounded with 
a yellow ring referred to as a halo. The dam­
aged tissue often drops out of the leaves, leav­
ing small holes. Severely infected leaves may 
fall early. The bacteria can also attack fruit, 
causing sunken spots; raised, scabby spots; or 
cracking.
Plants Affected: Many kinds of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: Bacterial spot 
pathogens overwinter in infected plant parts 
and seeds, in the soil, or on contaminated 
tools and pots. Reduce the chances of disease 
by using clean seeds, rotating crops, and prac­
ticing good garden sanitation. Plant resistant 
cultivars. Preventive copper sprays can be help­
ful if bacterial spots have been a past problem. 
If possible, remove and destroy severely in­
fected plants.
Black Spot
Symptoms on rose
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: This disease appears as cir­
cular black spots on infected leaves. The spots 
usually have fringed or indistinct margins and 
are often surrounded by a ring of yellow tis­
sue. Severely infected leaves may fall early. 
Black spot fungus can also infect stems, caus­
ing purplish or black blisters on young canes.
Plants Affected: Roses.
Prevention and Control: Black spot fun­
gus thrives in moist conditions. Avoid wetting 
plant leaves when watering. Prune plants to 
increase air circulation. Plant resistant spe­
cies or cultivars. If you expect black spot to 
be a problem based on past infections, spray 
plants weekly with sulfur or fungicidal soap. 
Once symptoms appear, black spot is very 
difficult to control. Remove and destroy infected 
leaves and canes. A 0.5 percent solution of 
baking soda (1 teaspoon baking soda in 1 
quart water) may help to control the disease. 
Spray infected plants thoroughly.

LEAF SYMPTOMS ■ 
373
Botrytis Blight
L - nm
Symptoms on peony
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Besides affecting fruit and 
flowers, Botrytis fungi can also damage leaves; 
infected leaves develop water-soaked spots that 
later turn brown or dry. For information about 
Botrytis on flowers, see “Botrytis Blight” on 
page 385; for Botrytis on fruit, see "Botrytis 
Fruit Rot" on page 389.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants, including cabbage, 
onions, peonies, and strawberries.
Prevention and Control: After they die 
down, cut or pull off and destroy the tops of 
herbaceous plants to remove a potential source 
of inoculum for the following season. Provide 
good air circulation through pruning and site 
selection. Remove and destroy infected parts.
Cedar-Apple Rust
which later expand and turn orange, form on 
upper leaf surfaces and on fruit. Brown spots 
may appear on the undersides of leaves. For 
details on how cedar-apple rust affects cedar 
trees, see “Cedar-Apple Rust" on page 398.
Plants Affected: Apples and crab apples. 
Similar rust diseases affect hawthorns (cedar* 
hawthorn rust) and quinces (cedar-quince rust).
Prevention and Control: Cedar-apple rust 
completes its life cycle only if fungal spores 
can travel between cedar (Juniperus spp.) and 
apple trees. Fungi growing in cedars send spores 
to infect apple trees. However, infections on 
the apple tree do not spread within the tree; 
the fungus can only can send spores back to 
infect cedar.
Prevention is the best control. Rust fungi 
need moisture, so promote drying through 
pruning and site selection to limit disease 
problems. Plant apple trees only if cedars are 
at least 4 miles away; this will reduce the 
chanccs of the disease spreading. If you want 
to grow both cedars and apple trees, plant 
rust-resistant species or cultivars of these plants. 
Many fungicides (including sulfur and lime- 
sulfur) that are effective against other fungal 
diseases are not very effective against rust 
diseases: preventive sprays of copper-based 
fungicides may provide some protection.
Cherry Leaf Spot
Symptoms on apple
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: On apples, rust symptoms 
commonly appear in spring. Tiny yellow spots,
Symptoms on cherry
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: The first noticeable symp­
toms are tiny purple spots on the upper leaf

374 
■ 
DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
surfaces. Corresponding whitish spots on the 
undersides of leaves may appear. The centers 
of these spots often dry and fall out, giving the 
leaves a shothole appearance. Entire leaves 
may turn yellow and drop early. Fruit, as well 
as leaf and fruit stems, can also show symptoms.
Plants Affected: Cherries and, less often, 
plums.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Clean up fallen leaves in autumn to 
remove overwintering fungi. Preventive sulfur 
sprays help to reduce disease severity.
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Downy mildew infections 
begin as angular yellow spots on the upper 
leaf surfaces; these spots eventually turn brown. 
Corresponding white, tan, or gray, cottony 
spots form on the undersides of the leaves. 
Downy mildew can also attack young shoots 
and fruit, forming a white coating.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. This disease is a seri­
ous problem on grapes.
Prevention and Control: Downy mildew 
thrives during cool, moist weather. Control 
downy mildew on your plants by promoting 
drying (through pruning and site selection) 
and growing resistant cultivars. Plant disease- 
free seeds and bulbs. Remove and destroy 
badly infected leaves. Sprays of bordeaux mix 
or other copper-based fungicides may reduce 
the spread of the disease.
Early Blight
Symptoms on tomato
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Early blight symptoms appear 
first on lower leaves as brown spots with con­
centric rings; these spots eventually spread to 
cover the leaves. Affected leaves drop early, 
exposing fruit to sunscald. Spots and cankers 
may also appear on stems.
Plants Affected: Tomatoes and potatoes.
Prevention and Control: Clean up plant 
d e b ris to  rem ove o v erw in terin g  sites. U se 
disease-free seeds and seed potatoes. Rotate 
crops and plant resistant cultivars. Preventive 
copper-based fungicide sprays may help reduce 
the spread of early blight. Remove and destroy 
severely infected plants.
Late Blight
Symptoms on potato
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: On leaves, late blight begins 
as tiny brown spots, which develop into green­
ish gray or brown areas that can expand to
Downy Mildew
Symptoms on grape

LEAF SYMPTOMS ■ 375
cover whole leaves. These spots may be sur­
rounded by a ring of yellow tissue on the 
upper surfaces of leaves and a ring of whitish 
fungal growth on the leaf undersides. Brown­
ish black areas may form on stems. Fruit rots 
and shrivels quickly; tubers may show a red­
dish brown dry rot.
Plants Affected: Potatoes and tomatoes.
Prevention and Control: The fungus that 
causes potato late blight overwinters on dis­
eased tubers. Harvesting all tubers and dis­
posing of those that are infected limit the 
disease the following season. Rotate crops and 
select resistant cultivars. Plant only certified 
disease-free seed potatoes.
Leaf Blister
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: The symptoms of this dis­
ease appear on developing needles. Mottled 
yellow spots appear first, changing to reddish 
ororangish brown. Severely damaged needles 
may fall by midsummer.
Plants Affected: Many kinds of needle­
leaved plants.
Prevention and Control: Site plants where 
they will get good air circulation. Clean up 
fallen needles; prune off damaged tips. If plants 
have been infected in previous seasons, spray 
with bordeaux mix when new shoots are half- 
grown; repeat 2 weeks later.
Rust
Needlecast
Sym ptom s on pine 
Sym ptom s on pine
Sym ptom s on oak
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Swollen, yellow or brownish 
blisters appear on upper surfaces as leaves 
develop in the spring. The spots may expand 
and run together to cover leaves; seriously 
damaged leaves may fall early.
Plants Affected: Oaks.
Prevention and Control: Mild, moist 
weather conditions promote the development 
of this disease. Oak leaf blister usually only 
attacks young, developing leaves in the spring; 
older leaves, later in the season, are not affected. 
Control is usually not necessary. If your trees 
were severely infected the preceding season, 
apply a dormant spray of lime-sulfur or bor­
deaux mix before the buds open in spring.
&
Sym ptom s on hollyhock 
Sym ptom s on blackberry
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Yellow or white spots form 
on upper leaf surfaces. Orange or yellow spots 
or streaks appear on the undersides of leaves. 
Spots are fungal structures that release spores.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.

376 ■ DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Prevention and Control: Provide good 
air circulation and avoid wetting leaves when 
watering. Remove and destroy seriously affected 
parts. Starting early in the season, dust plants 
with sulfur to prevent infection or to keep 
mild infections from spreading. For bramble 
fruits, immediately destroy any infected plants 
and replant resistant cultivars.
Septoria Leaf Spot
Symptoms on tomato
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Leaf damage starts as small 
yellow spots that gradually turn brown; they 
are often surrounded by a ring of yellow or 
brownish black tissue. Whole leaves may turn 
yellow and drop, exposing fruit to sun, which 
may result in sunscald. This disease usually 
starts on lower leaves and progresses upward.
Plants Affected: A wide range of herba­
ceous plants.
Prevention and Control: Remove and 
destroy infected leaves. Clean up plant debris 
in fall. Use disease-free seed. Crop rotation 
and the use of resistant cultivars will reduce 
the chances of Septoria leaf spot.
Leaf Symptoms: 
Leaves Yellow or Discolored
Leaf discoloration can be from cell death, 
or it can be from an interruption of plant bio­
chemical processes as a result of nutrient de­
ficiencies or environmental pollutants.
Foliar Nematodes
Symptoms on chrysanthemum
Type of Problem: Nematodes.
Symptoms: Leaves show yellow patches 
that later turn brown or black; these blotches 
may enlarge to cover whole leaves, causing 
early leaf drop. Symptoms start near the bot­
tom of plants and work upward. Infected shoots 
are stunted, and flowers may be deformed.
Plants Affected: A wide range of her­
baceous plants. Plants that are particularly 
susceptible include chrysanthemums, asters, 
dahlias, phlox, primroses, and strawberries.
Prevention and Control: Avoid planting 
susceptible species. Foliar nematodes move 
up stems in a film of water. Choose a site with 
good air circulation, and thin stems for quick 
drying. Clean up debris to eliminate overwin­
tering sites. Destroy infected plant parts.
Iron Deficiency or Overly High pH
Damage on gardenia 
Damage on azalea
Type of Problem: Environmental. 
Symptoms: The youngest leaves, those 
near the tips of shoots, turn yellow except for

LEAF SYMPTOMS ■ 377
the veins, which remain green.
Plants Affected: Acid-loving plants, 
including blueberries, oaks, hollies, azaleas, 
and rhododendrons.
Prevention and Control: Symptoms of 
iron deficiency appear when the soil is not 
sufficiently acidic. Symptoms commonly occur 
on susceptible plants growing near buildings 
because lime that leaches out of the concrete 
foundations raises soil pH. In most cases, iron 
is present in the soil in adequate amounts, but 
plant roots cannot absorb it if the pH is not 
in the appropriate range for that plant. The 
long-term solution to this problem is to plant 
in acidic soil or to make the soil acidic by adding 
sulfur or peat moss. Planting in raised beds 
amended with peat moss can also provide good 
growing conditions for acid-loving plants. Mulch 
acid-loving plants with evergreen needles. The 
way to quickly save an ailing plant is to spray a 
commercial chelated iron product on its leaves. 
Spraying leaves with seaweed extract will also 
help to provide the necessary nutrients.
Leaf Scorch
Damage on maple
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: Leaf scorch appears as yel­
lowing and browning of leaves beginning along 
the margins and tips. Associated symptoms 
may include wilting, rolling of leaves, stunted 
growth, and death of the plant.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: The 2 major 
causes of leaf scorch are drought and reflected 
heat. Avoid drought injury to plants with timely 
watering. On the average, most garden plants 
need the equivalent of about 1 inch (2 gallons 
per square foot) of water per week for every 
foot depth of rooting. Avoid frequent, light 
watering, which will promote shallow rooting. 
Reflected heat from surrounding pavement is 
mostly a problem for street trees; there is no 
control. Avoid planting highly susceptible 
trees, such as horse chestnuts and maples, in 
these sites.
Mosaic
Type of Problem: Viral.
Symptoms: Mosaic-infected leaves are 
mottled with yellow, white, and light and dark 
green spots or streaks. Fruit may show similar 
symptoms. Plants are often stunted (see pho­
tograph on page 403).
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars when available. Mosaic viruses are 
mostly spread by insect pests, especially aphids 
and leafhoppers. If possible, deny these carri­
ers access to your crop by covering the plants 
with floating row cover. For more information 
on preventing and controlling aphids and leaf­
hoppers, see pages 269 and 302. Once plants 
are infected, there are no controls; remove 
and destroy infected plants.
Sym ptom s on squash

378 ■ DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Nitrogen Deficiency
------------------ L_
Damage on pepper
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: Nitrogen deficiency appears 
as a uniform yellowing of the oldest leaves 
(those nearest the base of the stem). A less- 
obvious symptom is stunted and spindly growth.
Plants Affected: All plants.
Prevention and Control: Yearly appl ica- 
tions of supplemental nitrogen are most impor­
tant in the vegetable garden. Other plantings 
can get the nitrogen they need from regular 
applications of compost or aged manure. 
Organic nitrogen sources include soybean meal, 
dried blood, composted manure, and compost. 
In the vegetable garden, you can provide nitro­
gen by growing a leguminous cover crop every 
other season. If your plant shows deficiency 
symptoms, spray the leaves with fish emulsion.
High concentrations of ozone in the atmo­
sphere may cause early fall color and leaf 
drop. This damage can be difficult to diag­
nose because symptoms mimic many other 
disease conditions. Check for similar damage 
on other ozone-susceptible plants growing in 
the same area.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and ornamental plants. Plants such as beans, 
spinach, tomatoes, blackberries, sweet gums, 
pines, and tulip poplars are particularly sensi­
tive to ozone.
Prevention and Control: Ozone levels in 
the air may reach damaging levels during the 
hot, calm days of mid- to late summer. Auto­
mobile exhaust is a major source of ozone 
pollution. There is no cure for ozone damage. 
Avoid it in following years by planting less- 
susceptible plants, including beets, lettuce, 
and strawberries.
PAN Damage
Ozone Damage
Damage on nasturtiums
Type of Problem: Environmental. 
Symptoms: Ozone damage appears as 
white or tan stippling or flecking on leaves.
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: Exposure to PAN (peroxyacyl 
nitrate) causes a silvery glaze on the lower 
surfaces of leaves, resembling damage due to 
frost, sunscald, mites, thrips, or leafhoppers. 
Young, rapidly growing tissue is most sensitive 
to PAN injury.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Plants that are partic­
ularly susceptible include petunias, beans.
Damage on romaine lettuce
Copyrighted material

LEAF SYMPTOMS ■ 379
lettuce, peppers, and tomatoes.
Prevention and Control: PAN is a major 
component of engine exhaust and is a prob­
lem in smoggy areas. If you live where PAN 
damage is a recurring problem, grow plants 
that tolerate these pollutants, such as sugar 
maples, arborvitae, winged euonymus, English 
ivy, snapdragons, cabbage, cucumbers, and 
squash.
Phosphorus Deficiency
Damage on corn
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: A bluish or purplish cast to 
leaves or stems is the most common symptom 
of phosphorus deficiency; some plants develop 
purple spots. Phosphorus-deficient plants also 
do not flower and fruit as well as healthy 
plants do.
Plants Affected: All plants.
Prevention and Control: Phosphorus defi­
ciency symptoms develop fairly frequently in 
transplants set out in early spring. Unlike some 
other nutrients, phosphorus does not move 
through the soil; roots must grow to reach it. 
Until the soil warms sufficiently to stimulate 
root growth, plants may not be able to take up 
enough phosphorus.
Organic matter contains both phospho­
rus and potassium, so enrich your soil with 
plenty of compost, leaf mold, and other organic 
materials. Other sources of phosphorus include 
bonemeal and rock phosphate.
Damage on tomato
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: Symptoms usually appear 
on older leaves first as yellowing and browning 
of the leaf margins. Dead areas on edges may 
drop, giving the leaves a ragged appearance. 
If deficiency is severe, young leaves will show 
symptoms as well; consider having leaf tissue 
analyzed to confirm.
Plants Affected: All plants.
Prevention and Control: Soil tests can 
alert you to deficiency problems before they 
become serious. Regular applications of com­
post or other organic fertilizers will help to 
maintain an even potassium supply. Sources 
of potassium include kelp meal, granite dust, 
greensand, and wood ashes. Use wood ashes 
sparingly, as they can raise the soil pH.
Sulfur Dioxide Injury
Damage on blackberry
Type of Problem: Environmental. 
Symptoms: Mild cases of sulfur dioxide 
damage show up as general leaf yellowing.
Potassium Deficiency

580 ■ DISEASE SYMPTOM Gl/IDE
More severe damage involves yellowing or 
browning of the tissues between leaf veins.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: Sulfur dioxide 
is an air pollutant, primarily a result of indus­
trial processes. Where these pollutants are a 
problem, grow tolerant trees such as ginkgos, 
junipers, sycamores, and arborvitae. Vegeta­
bles that tolerate sulfur dioxide include cucum­
bers. com , and onions.
Sym ptom s on tomato 
Sym ptom s on strawberry
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Infection by wilt fungi cause 
leaves to yellow and leaf stems to droop, giv­
ing plants a wilted appearance. The yellow 
leaf patches turn brown and may spread to 
cover whole leaves. Leaves often fall early, 
and plants will die. Symptoms usually first 
appear on the lower or outer parts of plants. 
The interior of the stem near the base may be 
discolored (see photograph of stem damage 
on page 396).
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Some particularly sus­
ceptible plants include tomatoes, peppers, 
melons, asters, chrysanthemums, peaches, 
cherries, strawberries, and maples.
Prevention and Control: Verticillium and 
Fusarium wilt fungi cause similar symptoms. 
Verticillium wilt is more common in cool 
weather in temperate areas of the country.
There is no cure for Verticillium wilt. 
The most effective control is the use of wilt- 
resistant culti\ars. when available. Crop rota­
tion is not very effective because so many 
species are susceptible to Verticillium wilt. 
Soil solarization may help to control it.
Winter Injury
Damafie on cherry laurel
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: Symptoms of cold injury 
can be similar to sunscald symptoms: blotchy, 
water-soaked areas on leaves. Shoot tips often 
die back (see stem damage photograph on 
page 396).
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: In winter, ever­
greens can suffer from drying when their roots 
cannot get sufficient water from frozen ground. 
Water plants thoroughly in late fall. Spray 
leaves with an antitranspirant to reduce water 
loss. If winter damage has been a problem in 
the past, move plants to a more sheltered spot 
or erect a barrier (such as a piece of burlap) to 
protect the plants from drying winds. Prune 
out damaged wood in spring.
Cold, or in some cases cool temperatures, 
also damages herbaceous plants. If you plant 
com or beans too early, these heat-loving plants 
suffer during extended cool weather, even 
though the temperature never dips below 
freezing. Sub-freezing weather in the spring
Verticillium Wilt

LEAF SYMPTOMS ■ 381
can damage tender seedlings as well as new 
shoots and flowers of woody plants. Accli­
mate indoor seedlings to outdoor tempera­
tures gradually to help the plants adapt to the 
cold. Protect garden seedlings and transplants 
with cloches or row cover.
Yellows
Sym ptom s on marigolds
Type of Problem: Mycoplasma-like or­
ganisms.
Symptoms: This disease produces a grad­
ual yellowing of leaves. Plants often appear 
dwarfed. Plant parts, including roots and 
flowers, may be deformed. On trees, leaves 
turn yellow, then brown, and may drop early. 
Symptoms appear over the whole crown of 
the tree. Plants may die in a single growing 
season.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Aster yellows affects 
many plants, including carrots, lettuce, 
tomatoes. China asters, and gladiolus. Elm 
yellows (also known as elm phloem necrosis) 
attacks several species of elms.
Prevention and Control: Yellows diseases 
are commonly transmitted by leafhoppers, so 
controlling the pests will reduce the chances 
of disease (see page 302 for controls). Remove 
weeds that provide overwintering sites for the 
pathogen, including thistles. Queen Anne’s 
lace, dandelions, and wild chicory. Remove 
and destroy infected plants.
Leaf Symptoms: 
Leaves with White, Gray, 
or Black Patches
Discolored patches on leaves may be signs 
of the pathogen. For example, the white pow­
dery covering of powdery mildew is actually 
the fungus spreading across leaf surfaces.
Powdery Mildew
Sym ptom s on pum pkin 
Symptoms on zinnia
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Plants suffering from pow­
dery mildew look as if they have been dusted 
with flour. Powdery mildew fungi mostly attacks 
new leaves, causing distorted growth. It can 
also attack fruit; see “Powdery Mildew” on 
pages 387 and 388.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Some plants that are 
particularly susceptible include lilacs, phlox, 
bee balm, squash, roses, and zinnias.
Prevention and Control: Powdery mil­
dew thrives in hot weather, especially with cool 
nights. Unlike most fungal diseases, it is actu­
ally less of a problem in rainy weather.
Control by providing good air circulation 
and by growing resistant cultivars. Spraying 
with sulfur or lime-sulfur may reduce the spread 
of this disease. A 0.5 percent solution of bak­
ing soda (1 teaspoon baking soda in 1 quart 
water) may help to control the disease. Spray 
infected plants thoroughly.

382 ■ DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Salt Injury
Damage on ivy
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: The plant responds to excess 
soil salt just as it would to drought: stunting, 
wilting, drying out of leaves, even death. White, 
crusty material—salt—may build up on leaves 
of outdoor plants exposed to salt spray or 
road de-icing salts. A white crust on the sur­
face of the potting mix in which you grow 
houseplants can indicate salt buildup due to 
poor drainage or overfertilization.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: How you pre­
vent salt damage depends on how salt gets to 
the plants. In the North, this salt may come 
from sodium chloride used for road de-icing. 
Plants in coastal areas are often exposed to 
blowing sea spray. Some soils of the West are 
naturally high in salts, as are some irrigation 
waters in that region. Soluble salts from ani­
mal urine can also damage plant roots. Excess 
fertilizer, even manure, can cause salt buildup 
wherever drainage is poor or rainfall is insuffi­
cient to leach excess salt out of the soil.
Remove excess salts from soils by water­
ing heavily. Use sand or sawdust rather than 
de-icing salts to improve traction on icy 
sidewalks. Improve soil drainage, if necessary, 
by digging open trenches or burying perfora­
ted plastic drainage pipe within the soil to 
carry away excess water. In areas of the West 
where drainage is poor due to excess sodium 
in the soil, apply gypsum to loosen the soil
structure. Choose salt-tolerant plant species 
and cultivars.
Sooty Mold
Symptom<■ nn leaves
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Leaves and stems are speck­
led or coated with a thin black film, which can 
be wiped off to expose healthy green leaf sur­
faces. Plants may also feel sticky.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: This fungus 
grows on the sticky excretions (known as hon­
eydew) produced by insects such as aphids, 
scales, and mealybugs. The fungus does not 
directly injure the plant, but the black coating 
is unsightly and may interfere with photosyn­
thesis and reduce plant growth.
On small plants, you can wipe the coat­
ing off with a damp cloth. The best treatment 
is to control the insects producing the honey­
dew (see pages 269,304, and 320-21 for aphid, 
mealybug, and scale controls, respectively). If 
the plants do not have an insect problem, the 
honeydew may be from an overhanging plant.
Leaf Symptoms: 
Leaves Curled or Distorted
Disease can alter the normal pattern of 
leaf growth by inhibiting or stimulating cell 
development in unusual ways. Leaves may twist 
or form growths called galls.

LEAF SYMPTOMS ■ 383
Curly Top
light green galls that later turn white and then 
brown. Flowers may also be damaged.
Plants Affected: Fungal leaf galls are most 
common on azaleas and rhododendrons. 
Camellias may also get leaf galls.
Prevention and Control: Pick off and 
destroy infected leaves as soon as you spot the 
galls.
Peach Leaf Curi
Sym ptom s on tomato
Type of Problem: Viral.
Symptoms: Leaves of infected plants twist 
and curl upward, becoming stiff and leathery. 
They eventually turn yellow and then brown. 
Leaf stems bend downward. The plant may 
appear stunted, and fruit production stops.
Plants Affected: A wide range of herba­
ceous plants. Beets, tomatoes, beans, melons, 
and spinach are particularly susceptible.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Remove surrounding weeds, such as 
thistles and plantain, that provide disease over­
wintering sites. Leafhoppers carry the curly 
top virus, so keep these pests away by protect­
ing plants with floating row cover. See page 
302 for more leafhopper controls. Remove 
and destroy affected plants.
Leaf Gall
Sym ptom s on azalea
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Reddish or yellowish leaf 
spots often appear first. Infected leaves develop
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Infected plants develop yel­
lowish or reddish blisters on leaves, which 
become curled and distorted. The blisters even­
tually turn powdery gray. Entire leaves may 
turn yellow and fall early. Fruit can be de­
formed and may drop early. New growth can be 
stunted; infected shoot tips may die back.
Plants Affected: Peaches and nectarines.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Remove and destroy infected leaves. 
Peach leaf curl is usually worst during cool, 
wet springs. If this disease has been a problem 
in past years, apply a dormant spray of lime- 
sulfur or bordeaux mix.
Leaf Symptoms: 
Leaves Wilted
Leaves on diseased plants can become 
limp from the death of cells that move water 
and nutrients in the stems. Wilting is usually 
accompanied by other signs or symptoms.
Sym ptom s on peach

384 ■ DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Bacterial Wilt
Sym ptom s on cucum ber
Type of Problem: Bacterial.
Symptoms: Leaves appear limp and 
wilted. Infected stems wilt and collapse quickly. 
All affected parts are soft at first, but turn 
hard and dry. When you pull apart a cut stem, 
you may see long, sticky strands of whitish 
bacterial ooze. Spots may occur on fruit.
Plants Affected: A wide range of herba­
ceous plants. Cucumbers, melons, and squash 
are very susceptible. Similar wilts affect toma­
toes and beans.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars and use disease-free seed. Control 
cucumber beetles (see page 285) and grass­
hoppers (see page 294), which transmit the 
disease as they feed; protect plants with floating 
row cover. Remove and destroy infected plants.
Fusarium Wilt
wilted appearance. The yellow leaf patches 
turn brown and may spread to cover whole 
leaves. Leaves often fall early, and the plants 
will die. Symptoms usually first appear on the 
lower or outer parts of plants. In some cases, 
the symptoms are most apparent on only 1 
side of a plant. If you cut the stem near the 
base, you may notice a brown discoloration in 
the interior.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Common hosts include 
tomatoes, peas, peppers, melons, dahlias, and 
mimosa trees.
Prevention and Control: Fusarium and 
Verticillium wilt fungi cause similar symptoms. 
Fusarium wilt thrives in warmer areas.
Plant resistant cultivars. Crop rotation is 
of limited value in starving these pests; Fusarium 
fungi can survive in the soil a number of years 
in the absence of a susceptible plant. Remove 
and destroy infected plants. Soil solarization 
may reduce the incidence of this disease.
Verticillium Wit
Sym ptom s on tomato
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Wilt fungi cause leaves to 
yellow and leaf stems to droop, giving plants a
Sym ptom s on tomato 
Sym ptom s on strawberry
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Wilt fungi cause leaves to 
yellow and leaf stems to droop, giving plants a 
wilted appearance. The yellow leaf patches 
turn brown, and may spread to cover whole 
leaves. Leaves often fall early, and the plants 
will die. Symptoms usually first appear on the 
lower or outer parts of the plant. The interior 
of the stem near the base may be discolored 
(see photograph of stem damage on page 3%).

FLOWER AND FRUIT SYMPTOMS ■ 385
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Some particularly sus­
ceptible plants include tomatoes, peppers, 
melons, asters, chrysanthemums, peaches, 
cherries, strawberries, and maples.
Prevention and Control: Verticillium and 
Fusarium wilt fungi cause similar symptoms. 
Verticillium wilt is more common in cool 
weather in temperate areas of the country.
There is no cure for Verticillium wilt. 
The most effective control is the use of wilt- 
resistant cultivars, when available. Crop rota­
tion is not very effective because so many 
species are susceptible to Verticillium wilt. 
Soil solarization may help to control the disease.
Waterlogged Soil
Damage on yew
Type of Problem: Environmental. 
Symptoms: Because waterlogging inhib­
its root function, it causes essentially the same 
symptoms as droughty conditions do—wilting. 
Other common symptoms include yellowed 
leaves and sudden leaf drop.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: When the soil 
is flooded with water, pores that previously 
held air become filled with water. But root 
cells need oxygen in order to function, and 
the cells may die if they are deprived of air 
long enough. Besides causing wilting, water­
logged soils provide ideal conditions for bac­
teria to attack the damaged roots.
Waterlogging results if you apply too much
water to the soil. Also, certain soils are natu­
rally prone to waterlogging. Improve soil drain­
age by adding organic matter or making raised 
beds. Water plants evenly, according to their 
needs. Severely damaged plants may not re­
cover and should be removed.
Flower and Fruit Symptoms: 
Flowers Discolored
Flower discoloration may be caused by 
cell death or from signs of the disease organism 
appearing on flower parts.
Botrytis Blight
Sym ptom s on rose
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Botrytis blight generally 
begins on flowers, producing a white, gray, or 
tan, fluffy growth. The fungus then spreads 
to the flower stalk, weakening the stalk and 
causing the flowers to droop. Affected plant 
parts eventually turn brown and dry. For infor­
mation about Botrytis on leaves, see “Botrytis 
Blight" on page 373; for Botrytis infection on 
fruit, see “Botrytis Fruit Rot“ on page 389.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. The blooms of such 
flowers as roses, begonias, peonies, chrysan­
themums, dahlias, and geraniums are particu­
larly susceptible.
Prevention and Control: Provide good 
air circulation through pruning and site 
selection. Remove and destroy affected parts.

386 ■ DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Brown Rot
r*
Sym ptom s on cherry
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Infected flowers appear 
wilted and browned. Eventually they are cov­
ered with light brown spore masses, which then 
attack developing fruit. Small cankers appear 
near branch tips. For more on fruit damage, 
see "Brown Rot" on page 390.
Plants Affected: Peaches, cherries, plums, 
and other stone fruits.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Prune trees to provide for good air 
circulation. Prune out and destroy damaged 
shoots. Pick off and clean up rotted and shriv­
eled fruit. Spray with sulfur just before blos­
soms open and again after blossoming to protect 
the fruit. Another spray, just before harvest, 
will protect fruit from brown rot during storage.
Flower Blight of Camellia
and run together, turning whole flowers brown.
Plants Affected: Camellias.
Prevention and Control: Avoid bringing 
the fungi into your garden by only purchasing 
bare-root plants; also, pick off and destroy 
any flower buds before planting. If disease 
strikes, remove and destroy all infected flow­
ers and buds, including those that have fallen 
from the plants. Remove the existing mulch 
and replace with a fresh, 3" thick layer. Use a 
preventive spray of bordeaux mix the follow­
ing spring.
Flower and Fruit Symptoms: 
Fruit with Spots
Disease organisms can also invade fruit, 
killing cells in the fleshy fruit tissues. Fruit 
with mild symptoms may still be harvestable, 
but as symptoms progress, fruit may be ruined.
Anthracnose
Sym piom s on hean 
Sym ptom v on tomato
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Various anthracnose diseases 
affect fruit, producing small, dark, sunken spots. 
As the disease progresses, the spots may spread. 
Pinkish spore masses appear in the center of 
the spots in moist weather. Fruit eventually 
rots. Other plant parts are also affected by 
anthracnose; see "Anthracnose" on page 371 
for more information.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Tomatoes as well as
Sym ptom s on camellia
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Flower blight fungi produce 
small brown spots on petals. These spots enlarge

FLOWER AND FRUIT SYMPTOMS ■ 387
cucumbers and melons are often affected; 
similar fungi attack beans.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Using disease-free seeds and crop 
rotation may help prevent anthracnose dis­
eases in vegetables. Copper sprays may pro­
vide some protection. Remove and destroy 
severely infected plants.
Apple Scab
Sym piom s on apple
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Fruit infected with apple scab 
shows green or velvety brown spots, which later 
turn into raised, brown, corky areas. Leaves 
are usually also infected; see “Apple Scab" on 
page 371 for more details.
Plants Affected: Apples and crab apples.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Rake up and dispose of fallen leaves. 
Apple scab is most prevalent in areas with 
cool, moist summers because the spores spread 
rapidly in wet weather. In spring, regular cop­
per, sulfur, or lime-sulfur sprays may prevent 
apple scab fungi from infecting young leaves 
and fruit, reducing damage and the chance of 
apple scab recurring later in the season.
Flower and Fruit Symptoms: 
Fruit with Off-Color Patches
Odd-colored patches on fruit may be from 
cultural or environmental problems, or may be 
signs of a pathogen.
Blossom End Rot
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: A water-soaked spot on the 
end of fruit gradually enlarges and turns brown 
or black, with a leathery appearance. The end 
of the fruit will appear flattened.
Plants Affected: Tomatoes and peppers.
Prevention and Control: Blossom end 
rot is commonly from calcium deficiency. This 
often occurs when hot, dry weather or rapid 
growth (due to excess nitrogen, for example) 
draws extra water and nutrients to the leaves, 
starving fruit for this nutrient. Root damage 
can also interfere with calcium uptake.
To avoid blossom end rot, keep the soil 
evenly moist by watering regularly and put­
ting down a thick layer of organic mulch. 
Cultivate carefully to avoid damaging roots.
Powdery Mildew
Sym ptom s on apple
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Fruit infected with powdery 
mildew can crack or have raised webbing (called
Sym ptom s on tomato
Copyrighted material

388 ■ DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
russeting) on their surfaces. The fruit may 
also show a white powdery coating; see "Pow­
dery Mildew" on this page. This disease can 
also attack leaves; see “Powdery Mildew" on 
page 381.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. The fruit of apples 
and grapes are particularly susceptible.
Prevention and Control: Powdery mil­
dew fungi thrive in hot weather, especially in 
conjunction with cool nights. Unlike most other 
fungal diseases, it is actually less of a problem 
in rainy weather.
Plant resistant cultivars: Control pow­
dery mildew on your plants by providing good 
air circulation and growing resistant cultivars. 
Spraying with sulfur or lime-sulfur may reduce 
the spread of this disease. A 0.5 percent solu­
tion of baking soda (1 teaspoon baking soda 
in 1 quart water) may help to control the dis­
ease. Spray infected plants thoroughly.
Sunscald
Damage on tomato
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: Sunscald appears on fruit as 
a water-soaked, blistered spot that eventually 
dries out and turns brown. Sunscald can also 
affect leaves, starting as pale green areas that 
later turn brown and dry.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Fruit most commonly
damaged includes tomatoes, peppers, and 
apples.
Prevention and Control: Bright light or
excessively high tem peratures can cause 
sunscald. On tomatoes this problem commonly 
occurs when a disease such as leaf spot causes 
leaves to fall, suddenly exposing once-shaded 
fruit to full sunlight. Plant cultivars that are 
resistant to major foliage diseases. Once dam­
age occurs, there is no control.
Flower and Fruit Symptoms: 
Fruit with Powdery White 
Coating
The powdery mildew fungus can be on 
the surfaces of fruit as well as on leaves.
Powdery Mildew
Symptoms on apple 
Sym ptom s on gm pe
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: The fruit may color slowly 
or not at all and may show a powdery white 
coating. Other fruit symptoms include russet­
ing of the skin; see “Powdery Mildew” on 
page 387 for details. For information about 
this disease on leaves, see “Powdery Mildew" 
on page 381.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. The fruit of apples 
and grapes are particularly susceptible.
C

FLOWER AND FRUIT SYMPTOMS 
■ 
389
Prevention and Control: Powdery mil­
dew fungi thrive in hot weather, especially in 
conjunction with cool nights. Unlike most other 
fungal diseases, it is actually less of a problem 
in rainy weather.
Plant resistant cultivars: Control pow­
dery mildew on your plants by providing good 
air circulation and growing resistant cultivars. 
Spraying with sulfur or lime-sulfur may reduce 
the spread of this disease. A 0.5 percent solu­
tion of baking soda (1 teaspoon baking soda 
in 1 quart water) may help to control the 
disease. Spray infected plants thoroughly.
Flower and Fruit Symptoms: 
Fruit Rotted or Deformed
When fruit cells die, they can become 
soft, and the fruit may rot. If cell development 
is inhibited or stimulated, fruit may have unusual 
shapes.
Black Rot
Symptoms on grape
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Purplish brown spots appear 
on green fruit. Infected grapes shrivel up, turn 
black, and cling to the bunch. Leaves and 
shoots can also be affected, showing circular, 
reddish brown spots.
Plants Affected: Grapes.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Pick off and destroy infected fruit. 
Remove existing mulch or cover it with a fresh 
layer. Apply preventive sprays of bordeaux 
mix or another copper-based fungicide just 
before and immediately after bloom.
Botrytis Fruit Rot
Symptoms on strawberry
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: If you have ever picked straw­
berries in moist spring weather, you have prob­
ably seen some berries covered with a fuzzy 
gray or tan mold. When you touch an infected 
berry, it sends up a small cloud of spores. 
Other fruits, such as apples, may instead show 
an internal rot. For information about Botry­
tis on leaves, see "Botrytis Blight” on page 
373; for Botrytis on flowers, see "Botrytis Blight” 
on page 385.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Fruits of strawberries, 
grapes, and brambles are most commonly 
affected.
Prevention and Control: Cool tempera­
tures and high humidity promote Botrytis fruit 
rot. Removing infected fruit, whether living 
or dead, reduces the spread of the disease. 
Plants overstimulated with nitrogen fertilizer 
are most susceptible to gray mold, as are plants 
around which air cannot circulate to quickly 
dry leaves, stems, and fruit.

390 
■ 
DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Brown Rot
Corn Smut
Sympioms on peach
1I
Sympioms on plum 
(with mummies)
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Infected fruit shows small 
brown spots that often enlarge to cover the 
surface. These patches produce masses of 
grayish brown spores. The fruit eventually rots 
and shrivels up (forming a mummy): the dam­
aged fruit may drop or persist in the tree. 
Small cankers may form on branch tips. Early 
in the season, flowers may be infected; for 
more details, see “Brown Rot" on page 386.
Plants Affected: Peaches, cherries, plums, 
and other stone fruits.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Prune out to remove damaged shoots 
and to provide good air circulation. Pick off 
and clean up rotted and shriveled fruit. Spray 
with sulfur after blossoming to protect the 
fruit. Spray again just before harvest to pro­
tect fruit from brown rot in storage.
Symptoms on com
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Smut appears as swollen, 
grayish white galls on any part of the plant, 
especially ears and tassels. These galls con­
tinue to swell, and eventually release large 
quantities of powdery, dark brown spores.
Plants Affected: Corn.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Rotate crops. Clean up garden debris 
in the fall. Remove infected plant parts as 
soon as you spot them.
Frost Damage
Damage on strawberry
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: Rowers affected by frost have 
black centers, unlike the yellow centers of 
undamaged flowers. The tips of damaged fruit 
may be deformed. For stem symptoms, see 
“Frost Damage" on the opposite page.

STEM AND ROOT SYMPTOMS 
■ 
391
Plants Affected: Strawberries.
Prevention and Control: Once damage 
occurs, there is no control. If you expect frost, 
cover plants with a blanket overnight.
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Stems with Cracks or Holes
Openings in stems include cankers caused 
by disease organisms. Stem cracks or cuts may 
also be due to damage from frost or power 
equipment.
Cytospora Canker
cultivars when available. Vigorously growing 
trees are less susceptible to this disease. Prune 
out infected branches during dry weather; 
disinfect your pruners between cuts. Avoid 
making unnecessary wounds in the bark, which 
can provide an entry for the fungus. On stone 
fruits, it is particularly important to avoid 
winter damage, which can be caused by fertil­
izing the trees late in the season.
Frost Damage
Symptoms on peach
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: C ytospora canker (also 
known as Valsa or Leucostoma canker) causes 
yellowing, wilting, and dieback of new shoots. 
Inner bark on infected twigs may show black 
or reddish brown discoloration. Gummy can­
kers form on trunks and branches and increase 
in size until they girdle and kill the affected 
part. For other stem symptoms, see "Cytospora 
Canker” on page 393.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
plants. Stone fruits (such as peaches and plums), 
apples, pears, spruces, maples, poplars, and 
willows are among the most susceptible plants.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: In the dead of winter, a com­
bination of heat and cold can cause sunken 
areas or long cracks to form in the bark of 
woody plants. Damage is most common on 
the southwest side of a trunk. The last light of 
day warms the bark, then the bark rapidly 
cools as the sun drops below the horizon. For 
symptoms on fruit, see “Frost Damage" on 
the opposite page.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: Young trees that 
have thin bark (such as sugar maples) or trunks 
that are unshaded by side branches are partic­
ularly susceptible. Prevent damage to tree 
trunks by wrapping them with tree wrap or by 
painting the trunks with white latex paint diluted 
with an equal amount of water to reflect heat 
and keep the bark temperature uniform.
Damage on honey locust

392 
■ 
DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Lawn Mower Damage
Type of Problem: Cultural.
Symptoms: When a lawn mower hits a 
tree, it can cut a thin horizontal groove into 
the bark. Repeated damage may cause branch 
dieback or kill the tree. Lawn mowers can 
also damage surface roots. These wounds pro­
vide entrance points for diseases and insects. 
String trimmers also pose a hazard: careless 
use can cause the tool to strip the bark off the 
base of the tree, girdling and killing the plant.
Plants Affected: Any woody plant.
Prevention and Control: Use tools care­
fully around plants. Trim around trees and 
shrubs by hand, put plastic guards around 
trunks, or surround base of plants with mulch 
or groundcovers to eliminate the need to trim.
Lightning Damage
Damage on cottonwood
Type of Problem: Cultural.
Symptoms: The most common symptom 
is a large scar running down the trunk of the 
tree to the ground. In some cases, though, the
only symptom you'll see is branch dieback 
caused by the root injury. Or, in extreme cases, 
branches or the whole tree may explode.
Plants Affected: Any woody plant.
Prevention and Control: Help trees re­
cover by removing damaged bark or branches. 
Water during dry spells, and fertilize to pro­
mote vigorous growth. If you have an espe­
cially valuable tree, you might want to protect 
it with a lightning rod.
Sapsucker Damage
Type of Problem: Cultural.
Symptoms: Tree trunks and limbs are 
covered with even rows of closely spaced holes.
Plants Affected: Any woody plant.
Prevention and Control: Several birds in 
the woodpecker family feed on tree sap. These 
birds, known as sapsuckers, prefer trees with 
a high sugar content, such as sugar maples, 
birches, beeches, and apples. Sections of bark 
may fall off of severely damaged trees. The 
holes also provide entrance points for disease 
organisms and wood-boring insects. Damage 
is difficult to control; wrapping the trunk with 
tree wrap may help prevent further feeding.
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Stems Discolored
Discolored or blighted areas on stems 
may be due to death of cells or may be signs of 
the pathogen.
Damage on pine

STF.M AND ROOT SYMPTOMS ■ 
393
Cane Blight
Symptoms on raspberry
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: This disease commonly pro­
duces brownish purple spots on canes. Infected 
canes may wilt and die.
Plants Affected: Black raspberries are 
most commonly affected, although other bram­
ble fruits may also be attacked.
Prevention and Control: Choose a plant­
ing site with plenty of sunshine and good air 
circulation. Thin canes to avoid overcrowding. 
Remove diseased canes at ground level and 
destroy. The following year, spray with lime- 
sulfur as leaf buds begin to open in spring.
in size until they girdle and kill the affected 
part. Note: Bacterial canker may cause symp­
toms similar to those shown in this photo for 
Cytospora canker: controls for this disease 
are the same as those for Cytospora canker. 
For other stem symptoms, see "Cytospora Can­
ker" on page 391.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
plants. Stone fruits (such as peaches and plums), 
apples, pears, spruces, maples, poplars, and 
willows are among the most susceptible plants.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars when available. Vigorously growing 
trees are less susceptible to this disease. Prune 
out infected branches during dry weather: 
disinfect your pruners between cuts. Avoid 
making unnecessary wounds in the bark, which 
can provide an entry for the fungus.
Slime Flux
Cytospora Canker
Symptoms on peach
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Cytospora canker (also 
known as Valsa or Leucostoma canker) causes 
yellowing, wilting, and dieback of new shoots. 
Inner bark on infected twigs may show black 
or reddish brown discoloration. Gummy can­
kers form on trunks and branches and increase
Symptoms on tree
Type of Problem: Bacterial.
Symptoms: Slime flux (also known as 
bacterial wetwood) is indicated by the slimy 
liquid that oozes out of cracks and wounds in 
the bark, causing streaks on the trunk. The 
liquid may have a foul odor. In severe cases, 
shoot tips may wilt and die back.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
plants. Elms, maples, and poplars are particu­
larly susceptible.
Prevention and Control: In most cases, 
the damage caused by slime flux is cosmetic. 
The oozing cankers may be very unsightly. No 
control is available.

394 
■ 
DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Stem Tips Stunted
When development of a single stem is 
inhibited, the distances between leaves or 
branches telescopes down so the leaves or 
branches grow close together. The result is 
what appears to be a whorl of leaves or 
broomlike growth of branches.
Peach Rosette
Type of Problem: Viral.
Symptoms: This virus often produces 
stunting by causing trees to grow shoots that 
have abnormally short distances between the 
leaf nodes. Leaves may be discolored. The 
tree usually dies within a few months.
Plants Affected: Peaches and. less often, 
plums.
Prevention and Control: Similar symp­
toms are caused by a zinc deficiency. Try 
spraying the leaves with kelp extract. If the 
infected plant shows no response, remove and 
destroy it.
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Stem Tips Die Back
Stem tips may die back as a result of 
disease problems, such as fire blight, or from 
physical damage to the plant.
Construction Damage
Damage to tree
Type of Problem: Cultural.
Symptoms: Branch tips die back over 
the crown of the tree: overall growth is poor.
Plants Affected: All woody plants.
Prevention and Control: Prevent dam­
age by fencing off the area to keep equipment 
from hitting the plant or compacting the soil. 
Once the tree is damaged, there is little you 
can do; cut off any damaged bark and smooth 
off the wound edges so they can close pro­
perly. Fertilize, if necessary, and water during 
dry spells to help the plant recover.
Dutch Elm Disease
Symptoms on elm
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Dutch elm disease (DED) 
causes leaves to wilt, yellow, and drop early. 
Usually, branches show symptoms and die back 
one at a time. Sometimes the whole tree will 
wilt and die suddenly.
Plants Affected: Elm trees, particularly 
American elm.
Symptoms on peach

STEM AND ROOT SYMPTOMS ■ 
395
Prevention and Control: DED spores are 
carried by elm bark beetles or transmitted 
through natural root grafts. Prevent insect 
attacks (see page 288) and subsequent disease 
infection by keeping trees healthy and vigorous. 
Once the disease infects a tree, there is no 
effective organic control. Remove and imme­
diately destroy all infected elms. Remove the 
stump, if possible, or peel the bark off to 
below the normal soil line to deter elm bark 
beetles from feeding there. (The beetles can 
spread the disease as they move from diseased 
to healthy trees.)
Fire Blight
Sympioms on apple
Type of Problem: Bacterial.
Symptoms: Flowers usually show symp­
toms first, browning and shriveling. Leaves turn 
brown or black. Dead leaves remain on twigs. 
Symptoms progress from the tips of shoots to­
ward the roots. Shoot tips turn black, wilt, and 
curl downward. Cankers form on branches. 
Fruit turns black and may cling to the tree.
Plants Affected: Many plants in the rose 
family, especially pears, apples, and quinces.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Do not prune susceptible woody 
plants too severely or overfeed them, because 
both encourage succulent, disease-susceptible 
growth. Prune out infected branches, along 
with 6'-12" of healthy tissue; disinfect prun- 
ers in between cuts by dipping them in a 10 
percent bleach solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts 
water). Spray bordeaux mix during dormancy.
Oak Wilt
Symptoms on oak
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: While symptoms vary accord­
ing to the tree species affected, oak wilt com­
monly causes leaves to brown, wilt, and drop. 
Plants usually die within a year.
Plants Affected: Oaks.
Prevention and Control: Prune oaks only 
when they are dormant to reduce the chances 
of the fungus entering through the wounds. 
Once oak wilt begins, there is no control; 
remove and destroy infected trees. Dig a narrow. 
36"-40" deep trench between infected and 
healthy trees to break the natural root grafts 
through which the fungus can spread. Backfill 
the trench immediately to keep the healthy 
roots from drying out.
Twig Blight
Symptoms on juniper
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Infection begins on young 
leaves, causing tiny yellow spots. Branch tips

396 
■ 
DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
turn reddish brown and die back. You may see 
a grayish band at the base of the dead shoot.
Plants Affected: Many needle-leaved 
evergreens, including junipers and cypresses.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
species and cultivars. Prune off and destroy 
infected shoots on a dry day.
Verticillium Wilt
cies are susceptible. Soil solarization may help 
to control Verticillium wilt.
Winter Injury
Symptoms on maple
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Infection by Verticillium 
fungi causes leaves to yellow and leaf stems to 
droop, giving plants a wilted appearance (see 
photographs on page 384). The yellow leaf 
patches turn brown and may spread to cover 
whole leaves. Leaves often fall early, and the 
plants will die. Symptoms usually first appear 
on the lower or outer parts of plants. The 
interior of the stem near the base may be 
discolored.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Some particularly sus­
ceptible plants include tomatoes, peppers, 
melons, asters, chrysanthemums, peaches, 
cherries, strawberries, and maples.
Prevention and Control: Verticillium and 
Fusarium wilt fungi cause similar symptoms. 
Verticillium wilt is more common in cool 
weather in temperate areas of the country.
There is no cure for Verticillium wilt. 
Remove infected woody plants and replant with 
resistant cultivars, when available. Crop rota­
tion is not very effective because so many spe­
Damage on yew
Type of Problem: Environmental.
Symptoms: Symptoms of cold injury can 
be very similar to the symptoms of sunscald: 
blotchy, water-soaked areas on leaves. Shoot 
tips often die back. For other information on 
leaf damage, see "Winter Injury" on page 380.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: In winter, ever­
greens can suffer from drying when their roots 
cannot get sufficient water from frozen ground. 
Water plants thoroughly in late fall. Spray 
leaves with an antitranspirant to reduce water 
loss. If damage has been a problem in the past, 
move plants to a sheltered spot or erect a bar­
rier (such as a piece of burlap) to protect them 
from drying winds. Prune out damaged wood 
in spring; remove severely affected plants.
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Stems Entangled 
with Orange “Strings”
Dodder is a parasitic plant that entwines 
around host plants. The parasite draws food 
and water from its hosts, eventually weaken­
ing and smothering the infected plants.

STEM AND ROOT SYMPTOMS ■ 
397
Dodder
Dodder on ivy
Type of Problem: Parasitic plant.
Symptoms: Found throughout North 
America, dodder grows as a tangle of orange 
or yellowish threads that winds around stems 
and other parts of host plants. The parasite 
draws nutrients from the host plants, weaken­
ing them. Dodder's rampant growth can rapidly 
smother plantings.
Plants Affected: Many ornamentals as 
well as vegetables such as potatoes and onions.
Prevention and Control: Dodder does 
not have roots (except in early seedling stage), 
leaves, or chlorophyll. Beginning early in the 
season, dodder produces tiny flowers. Seeds 
are spread by animals and tools. The best way 
to get rid of dodder is to ruthlessly destroy it 
repeatedly throughout the season. Keep an eye 
out for seedlings that may develop the next 
season and weed them out as soon as you spot 
them. Don't add dodder to the compost pile, 
or you may be spreading seeds as you spread 
the finished compost.
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Stems with Clusters 
of Evergreen Leaves
Mistletoe is a parasitic plant that is better 
known as a seasonal decoration than as a 
cause of plant disease.
Mistletoe
Mistletoe on oak 
Mistletoe
Mistletoe berries
Type of Problem: Parasitic plant.
Symptoms: The mistletoe of Christmas, 
called leafy mistletoe, attacks mostly hard­
woods in the southern parts of the country. 
Clusters of evergreen growth appear on the 
limbs of these deciduous trees. Leafy mistle­
toe is a weak parasite, so it does little harm to 
the trees besides creating a strange appearance 
in winter.
Another type, known as dwarf mistletoe, 
attacks conifers throughout the world, but 
most seriously threatens trees in this country 
on the West Coast. It weakens, deforms, and 
even kills trees. The parasite looks like a tuft 
of branches, varying in color from yellowish 
to brownish green.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
plants.
Prevention and Control: Cut off and des­
troy infected branches as soon as you notice 
them to avoid the spread of this parasite.

398 
■ 
DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Stems with Swollen Growths
Galls and other swellings on stems and 
roots are due to overstimulated cell develop­
ment. Root swellings can interfere with water 
and mineral uptake, resulting in yellowing 
and wilting of the aboveground portions of 
the plants.
Black Knot
Symptoms on plum
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Black knot appears as un­
sightly swellings on twigs and branches. These 
swellings are usually black, but they may appear 
velvety green in early spring. Tips of infected 
branches often die back. Severe infections can 
kill whole limbs, and the tree may be stunted.
Plants Affected: Cherries and plums are 
most commonly affected.
Prevention and Control: In fall or late 
winter, prune off infected limbs, 6"-12" below 
the knots; disinfect pruners in between cuts 
with a 10 percent bleach solution (1 part bleach 
to 9 parts water). Destroy the prunings. Remove 
any wild plum or cherry trees nearby. For 
persistent infections, apply 2 sprays of lime- 
sulfur, 7 days apart, before the buds begin to 
grow in spring.
Cedar-Apple Rust
Symptoms on cedar
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Hard, brown swellings appear 
on branch tips. These galls do not seriously 
damage cedar trees, but they can mar the 
plants' appearance. Warm, moist weather in 
spring causes these galls to swell dramatically, 
and they produce gelatinous horns that release 
rust-colored spores. The spores then infect 
apple trees. For more details about this dis­
ease on apples, see "Cedar-Apple Rust" on 
page 373.
Plants Affected: Eastern red cedars and 
other species of juniper.
Prevention and Control: Cedar-apple rust 
completes its life cycle only where the fungal 
spores can travel back and forth between cedar 
and apple trees. Spores from cedar trees send 
spores to infect apple trees, but infections on 
the apple tree do not spread within the tree; 
they only can send the disease back to infect 
cedar.
Prevention is the best control. Rust dis­
eases thrive in moist conditions, so anything 
you can do to promote leaf drying will limit 
disease problems. Plant apple trees only if 
cedars are at least 4 miles away; this will reduce 
the chances of the disease spreading. If you 
want to grow both cedars and apple trees, plant 
rust-resistant species or cultivars of both plants. 
Prune off and destroy galls before late winter.

STEM AND ROOT SYMPTOMS ■ 
399
Crown Gall
Symptoms on rose
Type of Problem: Bacterial.
Symptoms: Above ground, the plant is 
stunted with yellowing leaves. Just beneath 
the soil line of an infected plant (or sometimes 
just above the soil line), you will see the tuber­
ous swellings that upset the mineral- and water- 
conducting vessels, causing the aboveground 
symptoms.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. Plants commonly 
attacked include stone fruits, grapes, brambles, 
euonymus, chrysanthemums, and roses.
Prevention and Control: This common 
bacterium enters plants through wounds, such 
as those that occur during transplanting. The 
bacteria may be transmitted from one plant to 
another on a trowel or shovel, which can wound 
a plant during digging. The bacteria may also 
survive on dead plants for years in infested 
soil, waiting for a suitable host plant.
Inspect nursery plants carefully before 
you buy to avoid infected plants. Protect healthy 
plants by dipping their roots in a solution of 
Agrobacterium radiobacter (sold as Galltrol-A) 
before planting. To control mild infections, 
prune off diseased growth; disinfect your prun- 
ers in between cuts with a 10 percent bleach 
solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts water). Remove 
and destroy severely infected plants. Avoid 
replanting the area with susceptible plants.
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Roots with Swollen Growths
Various diseases can cause roots to swell. 
but root growths may also be caused by the pres­
ence of beneficial nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
Club Root
S y m p to m s o n  cabbage
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Above ground, the plant may 
appear stunted, wilted, and yellowed. Below 
ground, infection causes the roots to swell 
into a gnarled mass that cannot supply water 
and nutrients to the plant.
Plants Affected: Cabbage family plants, 
such as cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli, and 
brussels sprouts.
Prevention and Control: Once it is in 
the soil, the causal fungus can infect wild 
cabbage family plants (such as wild mustard 
and shepherds purse) or survive for years even 
in the absence of a host plant. This fungus, 
however, thrives only in acidic soils, so you 
can completely check the disease by adjust­
ing the soil pH to 7.2 or slightly above. Soil 
solarization can also reduce the incidence of 
club root. Remove and destroy seriously in­
fected plants.
Copyrigh

400 
■ 
DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
Nitrogen-Fixing Nodules
Nitrogen-fixing nodules 
on bean
Type of Problem: Bacterial (beneficial).
Symptoms: Small, hard nodules form 
on the roots of host plants; plant appears 
healthy.
Plants Affected: Legumes, such as peas.
Prevention and Control: The relation­
ship of legumes and these bacteria (Rhizobium 
spp.) is generally beneficial to both. Plants 
supply bacteria with nutrients; bacteria con­
vert nitrogen from the air into a form that 
plants can use. To promote growth of these 
beneficial organisms, buy the bacteria in pow­
der form (called inoculant) and dust the seeds 
of appropriate crops before planting. Certain 
species work better with particular plants, so 
buy the right inoculant for your crop.
Root Knot Nematodes
Symptoms on tomato
Type of Problem: Nematodes. 
Symptoms: The symptoms produced by 
root knot nematodes are similar to those of
other diseases and disorders that interfere with 
proper root function. Above ground, plants 
may be yellowed and wilted; flowers and fruit 
are stunted or nonexistent. Below ground, how­
ever, you'll find numerous clubbed galls on the 
roots caused by the nematodes feeding inside.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants. These nematodes com­
monly attack fruit trees, com, lettuce, tomatoes, 
and potatoes.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars, when available. Rotate crops. Avoid 
spreading soil from infested to noninfested 
areas. Soil solarization helps to reduce nema­
tode populations. Or try a cover crop of 
marigolds, and turn them into the soil at the 
end of the season. Incorporate plenty of or­
ganic matter into the soil to promote natural 
nematode-controlling microorganisms. Drench­
ing the soil with neem may also help.
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Roots Die Back
Aboveground symptoms such as stunting 
and wilting may be the result of the death of 
cells in diseased roots.
Red Stele
Symptoms on strawberry
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Symptoms include stunted 
growth and wilting and death of older leaves 
or whole plants. Infected plants bear little or
Copyrighted me

STEM AND ROOT SYMPTOMS ■ 
401
no fruit. Young feeder roots die; older, infected 
roots have dead tips and a reddish brown dis­
coloration in the core of the roots.
Plants Affected: Strawberries.
Pre vention and Control: Remove and 
destroy infected and surrounding plants. If 
red stele has been a problem in the past, pre­
pare a new site for your strawberry bed and 
plant resistant cultivars.
Symptoms on birch 
Symptoms on oak
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Symptoms include leaves that 
are small, yellow or brown, and wilted. Decline 
may be gradual, over years, or rapid.
Other symptoms, which indicate Armillaria 
root rot may appear at the base of the plant. 
These include white mats of fungi and brown­
ish blac!* fungal strands on the roots or between 
the bark and the wood. Honey-colored mush­
rooms often grow around the base of dead or 
dying p ants. Severely damaged plants may 
fall over during a storm. For more information, 
see “Armillaria Root Rot" on page 403.
If you don’t see any signs of fungal growth 
near the base of the plant, suspect other types 
of root rot. To check for root damage, lift the 
plant out of the soil and carefully wash off the 
soil. Look for roots that are damaged with 
brown or black tips.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: These common 
soilborne diseases attack fully grown plants as
well as seedlings. Root rots are caused by a 
few different types of fungi, each most preva­
lent in certain areas or under certain conditions.
Plant resistant cultivars when available. 
Reduce the incidence of root rot with good 
cultural practices: Plant in well-drained soil, 
do not overwater, and direct surface water 
away from the crown of plants. Incorporating 
compost into the soil may also help to prevent 
some types of root rot. If a plant is diseased, 
you may be able to save it by pulling the soil 
back away from the crown, pruning off dis­
eased roots, and allowing the remaining exposed 
roots to air-dry. Also, disinfect tools after use 
with a 10 percent bleach solution (1 part bleach 
to 9 parts water) so that you do not spread 
disease from infested to healthy soil. Remove 
and destroy seriously infected plants.
Stem and Root Symptoms: 
Tubers Discolored or Rotted
Disease can also cause cells of storage 
organs such as tubers to die, either in the 
ground or in storage.
Bacterial Soft Rot
Symptoms on potato
Type of Problem: Bacterial.
Symptoms: In the garden or in storage, 
the fruit or storage roots first develop small, 
water-soaked spots. These areas enlarge, 
becoming soft, sunken, and discolored. You 
may notice a foul odor. Above ground, plants
Root Rot

402 
■ 
DISEASE SYMPTOM GUIDE
may appear yellowed, stunted, and wilted.
Plants Affected: A wide range of herba­
ceous plants. Vegetables with fleshy fruit or 
succulent stems are quite susceptible.
Prevention and Control: To avoid soft 
rots, handle fruits and vegetables (especially 
those you plan to store) carefully, both dur­
ing and after harvest. Soft rot bacteria enter 
wounds produced by rough handling as well 
as those caused when fruits, tubers, and roots 
are frozen or damaged by insects. Soft rots 
usually need a high moisture level to develop, 
so store produce in a cool, dry place. If you 
have had trouble with soft rot in past years, 
rotate crops to reduce the spread of the dis­
ease in the garden.
Scab
* 
5
r
i
Sym ptom s on potato
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Scab begins as small brown 
spots on the tubers or roots. These areas enlarge 
and run together, producing russeting and 
rough, corky areas. These spots are usually 
just on or below the surface, so the crop is still 
edible, although visually unappealing.
Plants Affected: Potatoes, beets, radishes, 
and other root crops.
Prevention and Control: Scab fungi thrive 
in light, sandy soils with a neutral or alkaline 
pH. Lowering the soil pH to below 5.2 will 
reduce the chance of disease. Start with certi­
fied disease-free seed potatoes. Rotate crops 
and plant resistant cultivars. Keep the soil 
evenly moist.
Whole Plant Symptoms: 
Seedlings Die
Damping-off fungi can infect and kill a 
wide range of plants at the seedling stage.
Damping-Off
Symptoms on semllings
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Damping-off fungi can kill 
seedlings before they even break through the 
soil, but a more dramatic demonstration of 
this disease occurs when it strikes seedlings 
just an inch or so tall. The fungi rot the stems 
right at the soil line and, overnight, infected 
seedlings topple over.
Plants Affected: All plants.
Prevention and Control: Plants growing 
in containers are more susceptible to damping- 
off than are those growing outdoors in the 
garden. Good cultural conditions usually con­
trol it; to prevent it from attacking your seed­
lings, grow them in well-drained soil with plenty 
of light. Do not allow them to crowd each other, 
or the stagnant air that results will promote 
the growth of damping-off fungi.
A thin layer of dry material, such as sand 
or perlite, sprinkled on the soil surface keeps 
seedling stems dry at the soil line, where 
damping-off often strikes. Even better is a 
layer of fine sphagnum moss, which not only 
keeps the surface dry but also reduces the 
chance of fungal growth. After a few weeks 
of growth, seedling stems toughen and no longer

WHOLE PI ANT SYMPTOMS 
■ 
4 0 3
are as susceptible to attack by damping-off 
fungi. If you've had past problem s with 
damping-off, use sterile potting mix or pas­
teurize your own potting soil (see “Pathogen- 
Free Potting Soil’* on page 413) when growing 
plants in containers.
Whole Plant Symptoms: 
Plants Stunted
Stunted growth is due to inhibited cell 
development. Many viruses cause stunting, 
but stunted growth also may be from drought 
or insufficient nitrogen.
Mosaic
\
x
Sym ptom s on bean
Type of Problem: Viral.
Symptoms: Mosaic-infected leaves are 
mottled with yellow, white, and light and dark 
green spots or streaks (see photograph on page 
377). Fruit may show similar symptoms. Plants 
are often stunted.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: Plant resistant 
cultivars. Mosaic viruses are mostly spread by 
insect pests, especially aphids and leafhoppers. 
If possible, deny these carriers access by cov­
ering your plants with floating row cover. For 
more control information on aphids and 
leafhoppers, see pages 269 and 302, respec­
tively. Once plants are infected, there are no 
controls; remove and destroy infected plants.
Whole Plant Symptoms: 
Plants Fall Over
If disease kills off a large portion of the 
root system, it can't support the aboveground 
part of the plant; the plant may collapse.
Armillaria Root Rot
Armillaria root rot
Type of Problem: Fungal.
Symptoms: Common symptoms of root 
rot include leaves that are small, yellow or 
brown, and wilted. Decline may be gradual, 
over a period of years, or rapid. Other symp­
toms that may appear include white mats of 
fungi and brownish black fungal strands on the 
roots or between the bark and the wood. Honey- 
colored mushrooms often grow around the 
base of dead or dying plants. Severely dam­
aged plants may fall over during a storm. For 
more on root rot. see “Root Rot" on page 401.
Plants Affected: A wide range of woody 
and herbaceous plants.
Prevention and Control: Armillaria root 
rot is prevalent throughout the country, espe­
cially at sites that were recently oak forests. 
Avoid Armillaria root rot by planting in sites 
not harboring the fungus or by planting disease- 
resistant plants. Unfortunately, many plant spe­
cies are susceptible; some resistant plants 
include pears, white fir, sweet gums, Oregon 
grape holly, and pines. Once plants fall over, 
there is obviously no way to restore them; 
remove the plant and what is left of the roots.

ORGANIC
CONTROLS
Using Remedies Safely
PART
I M

ust as interest in organic gardening methods has 
steadily increased in the past two decades, so has the 
range of control options for organic gardens. These 
range from new, highly sophisticated products that use 
insect hormones called pheromones to prevent pest 
insects from mating to more effective formulations of 
standard products such as horticultural oils.
:

I n  this section, you'll find information on 
control practices to incorporate into your gar­
dening routine to combat widespread prob­
lems, such as aphids and powdery mildew, 
along with specific products or methods that 
affect a single pest, such as surrounding seed­
lings with collars to prevent cutworm damage. 
Keep in mind that even organically accept­
able controls vary tremendously in their con­
venience and environmental impact. Always 
begin with the safest, least-toxic method be­
fore moving on to more toxic—and usually 
broader spectrum —controls. Even plant- 
derived pesticides can pollute water, kill 
honeybees, or make you sick if you mishandle 
them. However, few, if any, people, pests, 
wildlife, or beneficial insects will suffer ill 
effects when exposed to crop rotation, com­
panion planting, resistant cultivars, row cover, 
timed planting, or other control methods that 
prevent pest damage without having to actively 
kill the pests involved.
The control methods described in this 
section come from a variety of sources. Some 
are gardening practices that have been handed 
down as folklore through the ages, while oth­
ers are based on the latest scientific research. 
Many of them are simply matters of common 
sense—keep your plants healthy and they’ll 
be better able to fend off problems; use barri­
ers to exclude pests from your plants and your 
crops won't be eaten. Regardless of the meth­
ods you choose to use to protect your plants, 
use care when applying them. You'll notice 
that special precautions for use of some or­
ganic sprays and dusts are included in the 
descriptions that follow. Pay heed to the warn­
ing information included in these listings, and 
when using commercial products, always apply 
them according to the label specifications.
Types of Controls
The control methods described in this 
section are divided into four categories accord­
ing to the way in which they act on pests and 
also according to their level of potential harm 
to nontarget organisms, such as honeybees, 
fish, and even humans. The order of presenta­
tion reflects the order in which you should 
choose controls when dealing with the partic­
ular pest problems in your yard and garden.
■  Cultural controls. These are garden­
ing practices that help prevent pest problems. 
You can integrate these controls into your 
overall gardening routine. There are few, if 
any. harmful side effects on beneficial insects 
or other organisms.
■  Physical controls. These controls ex­
clude or remove pests from plants. Handpick­
ing insect pests is the most basic form of physi­
cal control.
406

PLANNING A C( )N'ITM )L STRATEGY ■ 
407
■ Biological controls. These methods use 
living organisms to kill garden pests. They 
include releasing and encouraging beneficial 
insects and applying bacterial insecticides.
■  Organic sprays and dusts. These include 
homemade pesticidal sprays, sulfur and cop­
per compounds, and botanical controls. They 
have varying levels of toxicity and are only to 
be used for severe problems when other types 
of control methods have proven inadequate.
Specific control methods do not always 
fit neatly into one of these four categories. As 
growers and researchers learn more about 
organic control methods, they often uncover 
information that causes them to rethink the 
way in which traditional remedies are viewed. 
For example, organic pesticides and fungi­
cides generally are substances that kill 
organisms. However, sulfur, generally classi­
fied as a natural fungicide, may actually pre­
vent fungal diseases by coating plants leaves 
so that pathogens are unable to infect a crop. 
This is technically a physical m ethod of 
protection.
Certain botanically derived insecticides 
actually act as growth or feeding regulators on 
pests. This means their mode of action is 
more biological than insecticidal.
Many cultural control practices are 
thought to work on a variety of levels. Com­
panion planting is generally thought of as a 
general cultural practice that lessens pest prob­
lems. In specific cases, the companion plants 
may attract beneficial insects, and so in a 
sense, are a biological control. Other plant com­
panions may serve as a trap crop for pests—a 
physical method of pest management. Often 
it is the oldest methods that are least under­
stood in terms of how and why they work.
Use the information about each control 
category to form a mental checklist for deal­
ing with pest and disease problems. Consider 
the advantages and disadvantages of each 
approach and how it fits into your garden 
plan. Most organic methods of pest and dis­
ease control rely on the gardener's ability 
to implement them completely—starting with 
awareness of pest emergence times through 
application of controls to subsequent moni­
toring of remaining pests. Always be sure to 
try all possible low-impact controls before 
considering more hazardous methods.
Planning a Control Strategy
How do you choose which control meth­
ods to use against a particular pest, such as 
Colorado potato beetles on potatoes or scab 
on apples? A good place to start is the “Problem- 
Solving Plant Guide" beginning on page 11. 
The Potato entry will suggest some control 
methods for the beetle, the Apple entry de­
scribes ways to prevent or lessen scab prob­
lems. You can then refer to the descriptions 
of various producLs and methods that follow 
for information on how to make or use speci­
fic controls.
For insects and related pests, you'll also 
find information to help you identify and under­
stand the pest, its life cycle, and how to man­
age it in the "Insect Identification Guide” 
beginning on page 268. The "Disease Symp­
tom Guide" beginning on page 370 provides 
similar information on plant diseases and 
disorders. Don't forget the possibility that the 
damage you find in your garden could be 
caused by a large animal pest. For some tips 
on stopping animal feeding, see “Stopping 
Animal Pests” on page 408. After you read the 
appropriate information in these sections, you 
should be able to craft the safest and most 
effective strategy for your garden.

-*08 
■ 
ORGANIC CONTROLS
Stopping Animal Pests
W
hether you garden in the suburbs or in 
a rural area, you may find that animals 
and birds cause you more headaches than 
insect pests do The trickiest part of coping 
with animal pests can be identifying the pest. 
Since many animals feed at dawn or dusk, 
you'll need to notice such signs as feeding 
patterns, tracks, tunnels, or excrement to fig­
ure out what culprit is invading your garden. 
For example, gnawed strawberries may be 
the work of birds, mice, or slugs. Controls 
that work for one pest may do nothing to stop 
another, so it's important to figure out exactly 
what pest is to blame before you act.
Animal deterrents fall into one of four 
categories.
■ Fences and barriers. These hinge on 
the assumption that there's probably some 
way to keep the pest out of your yard.
■ Traps. If you use live traps, you must 
be willing to transport the captured pest to a 
new location Other types of traps kill the pest 
to stop the damage.
■ Repellents. These work on the princi­
ple that most animals won't eat something 
that tastes or smells bad.
■ Scare tactics. These employ such gad­
gets as inflatable owls, plastic snakes, hawk­
shaped kites, and elaborate scarecrows.
At least one of these approaches should 
give you a fighting chance against whatever 
animal is dining in your garden. After you’ve 
discovered just which animal you're trying to 
discourage, the following tactics should help 
you out.
Deer
An electric fence, ond not necessarily a 
high one, is the most effective way to keep 
deer out. One design suitable for small areas 
uses two fences, an inner chicken-wire fence
4 ’ high ond a single-wire electric fence only 
T h ' off the ground ond located 3' outside 
the chicken wire. Deer find it hard to jump 
the chicken-wire fence with the electrified 
wire in the way. If you prefer a conventional 
woven wire fence instead of going electric, 
choose one at least 8 ' high. A second inner 
fence about 3 ' high increases the effective­
ness of a nonelectric fence because double 
obstacles confuse deer. If deer are nibbling 
just a few shrubs, consider enclosing these in 
woven wire fence cages. For a slight deer 
problem, this is an inexpensive, effective 
solution.
Repellents deter deer as long as the 
pressures of starvation or overpopulation don't 
force them to eat anything in sight. Buy soap 
bars in bulk and hang them from strings in 
trees. Or nail eoch bar to a 4' stake and drive 
the stakes at 15' intervals around your prop­
erty. Soap fragrance is more pervasive when 
the soap is wet, so a good strategy is to mist 
soap bars with water early in the evening just 
before deer begin to feed. Some gardeners 
report that human hair hung in mesh bags or 
old stockings is an effective repellent. You 
can probably collect all the hair you need 
from a barber.
One repellent that seems to work is made 
from eggs and water. Mix one egg per quart 
of water, multiplying the recipe as many times 
os you need to get the right amount of spray. 
With rainfall or heavy dew, some repellent will 
wash away. You can prolong the time it remains 
on plants by mixing it with a small amount of 
ontidesiccant, such as Wilt-Pruf or VaporGard. 
Other homemade repellents include water 
solutions of blood meal, hot sauce, or garlic 
oil. Many commercial repellents are currently 
available, including BGR (Big Game Repellent), 
made from dried eggs, Hot Sauce, made from 
ground hot peppers, and Hinder, a soap-based 
repellent.

PI-ANNINC. A CONTROL STRATEGY ■ 
409
Rabbits
The best way to Keep rabbits out of a 
garden is to erect a chicken-wire fence with 
mesh no larger than 1 " If you have existing 
picket or woven-wire fence, simply attach a 
2 ' wide strip of chicken wire to the bottom of 
the fence. Rabbits also sometimes burrow 
under a fence, so you may need to dig a 6 " 
deep trench and sink the chicken wire down 
into the soil to completely keep them out. If 
your soil is rocky, pile a 1' wide border of 
small stones around the periphery of your 
fence to discourage burrowing. To protect 
young trees and shrubs from rabbits gnow- 
ing bark in the winter, erect cylinders made of 
"  hardware cloth; the cages should be 1V - 2 ' 
hign (higher if you live in an area with deep 
snowfall) and should be sunk 2 " - 3 "  below 
the soil surface. This method is also effective 
in protecting trees from bark feeding by mice 
and voles.
Most deer repellents are also effective 
against rabbits. Some gardeners report that 
used cat box filler sprinkled on the lawn around 
ornamentals deters rabbits. Since effective­
ness wears off after about a week, you'll 
need to replace the litter often, especially 
after rain.
Moles
Moles eat grubs and earthworms, not 
plants. Nevertheless, their extensive tunnels 
ruin lowns and provide easy entry for mice 
and voles, which do dine on plant roots and 
bulos. If your yard is full of mole runs, chances 
are your soil is full of beetle grubs, the favor­
ite rood of foraging moles. The most humane 
wa / to discourage moles is to eliminate soil 
grubs by applying milky disease spores (see 
more information about this control on page 
460). When the grubs die, the moles will 
move on to better feeding grounds. But this 
approach requires patience; it may take sev­
eral years after initial application of milky 
disease spores for the grubs to disappear.
If you'd like to dispatch on active mole 
immediately, you must locate a permanent 
tunnel leading from the underground nest. 
Find a long, straight tunnel and press it down 
in a few places. If you find the tunnel reopened 
the next day, you've found a permanent 
passage. You can try flooding the mole out by 
filling this passage with water, but you must 
be prepared to kill it as soon as it comes to 
the surface in order for the method to be 
effective. You can also place any of the vari­
ous commercial mole traps along a perma­
nent passage and eventually eradicate your 
pest. Deciding whether getting rid of mole 
tunneling warrants killing these animals is a 
matter of personal choice.
Birds
Birds are both the gardener's friends 
and foes. While they eot insect pests, they 
also consume entire fruits or vegetables or 
will pick at your produce until it is damaged 
enough to be unappealing. Most bird controls 
involve making the area you wish to protect 
either less appealing to birds or more difficult 
for them to feed in.
The most effective control to protect bush 
and vine fruits ond small fruit trees is to cover 
them with lightweight plastic netting; cover 
row crops with floating row cover. You can 
also use a variety of commercial or home­
made devices to frighten birds away from 
your crops. Tactics that keep birds guessing 
include moving a scarecrow to a different 
spot every few days and tying pie pans, 
pinwheels, or strips of plastic or foil to its 
arms. Other bird-scaring devices include plas­
tic snakes, bird-scaring balloons, and inflat­
able owls and hawks. These are most effec­
tive when mounted on a fence at the garden's 
edge and relocated every few days

CULTURAL CONTROLS
Everything you do to encourage healthy plant 
growth can be considered a form of cultural 
pest control. As such, cultural controls are 
not usually applied in response to a specific 
problem, but instead are an integral part of an 
organic approach to gardening. From the 
moment you sketch out a planting scheme, 
turn up a shovelful of soil, or buy a seed or 
plant, pest prevention and control measures 
become a part of your gardening practices.
A Cultural Overview
You'll begin thinking about cultural con­
trols in the dead of winter when you're paging 
through seed an d  plant catalogs, looking for 
disease-resistant cultivars of your favorite 
vegetables. Most gardeners are aware that 
selecting plants and cultivars that are resistant 
to certain disease and insect problems can 
help them avoid problems later in the season.
Cultural controls also play a role in how 
and when you plant, how you water and ferti­
lize, and finally how you clean up your garden 
site in the fall when your plants have died off 
or have gone dormant for the winter.
Start with the Soil
A fundamental step in producing healthy 
plants is to promote healthy soil. Organically 
enriched, biologically active soil promotes plant 
health by encouraging root development, thus 
setting the stage for efficient use of water and 
nutrients. Healthy soil is also more likely to 
contain a natural, sustainable balance between 
beneficial and potentially destructive soil 
microorganisms.
Compost, a mix of decomposed organic 
materials, is one of the best things you can
4 1 0
add to your soil. See "How to Compost" on 
page 425 for directions on making this valu­
able soil amendment. You can also encourage 
overall soil fertility by adding general-purpose 
organic fertilizers or tea made from compost 
(see "Fungus-Fighting Tea” on page 427). When 
using packaged organic fertilizers, follow the 
label directions for proper application. If your 
plants show nutrient deficiency symptoms, nou­
rish them with the products listed in "Nutrients 
for Plant Deficiencies" on the opposite page.
If you suspect that your soil lacks certain 
nutrients, take a soil sample and have it ana­
lyzed by a reputable laboratory. Your local 
Cooperative Extension office or state land 
grant university can tell you how  to  take a soil
sample; they may also be able to perform the 
tests for you or will recommend a private 
testing laboratory.
Choose Plants That Fight Back
Many diseases and even insects can be 
controlled by growing resistant or tolerant cul­
tivars or species. By emphasizing disease 
resistance in your choice of cultivars, you can 
completely avoid some common pest problems. 
For example, some newer cultivars of shell 
pea, including ‘Maestro’, are resistant to mosaic 
virus as well as powdery mildew and Fusarium 
wilt. Similarly, ‘Slicemaster’ cucumber resists 
both downy mildew and powdery mildew, plus 
leaf spot, anthracnose, and mosaic virus.
Disease resistance also varies among spe­
cies within the same genus. Among salvias, 
for exam ple, the annual species. Salvia 
splendens, sold as a bedding plant, is seldom 
bothered by pests other than whiteflies. How­
ever, many of the perennial Salvia species that 
are native to arid climates have problems with

A CULTURAL OVERVIEW
4 1 1
mildews, rots, and insects. Whenever possible, 
get information (from extension agents, local 
nurseries, or fellow gardeners) about com­
mon pest and disease problems that occur in 
your area; use this knowledge to select plants 
that resist such problems. You'll find recom­
mendations for resistant cultivars and species 
in individual plant entries in the “Problem- 
Solving Plant Guide" beginning on page 11.
Consider Timing and Placement
You can avoid certain pest problems by 
planting when the pest isn't around. Some 
pests, such as carrot rust flies, lay eggs only at 
a certain time in spring. By delaying planting, 
you reduce the chance that your crop will be 
infested by that pest.
Where you put plants in the garden and 
in relation to one another can also have an 
effect on pests. Changing the planting site of 
crops from one year to the next in your vege­
table garden—known as crop rotation—can 
prevent pest populations from building up by 
denying them a food source from season to 
season. When practiced thoughtfully, crop rota­
tion can keep nonmobile pest populations from 
reaching damaging thresholds. Problems that 
are particularly easy to control through rota­
tion include onion and cabbage root maggots, 
black rot of broccoli, and most diseases caused 
by soilborne bacteria.
Companion planting—planting two or 
more types of plants in close proximity—is a 
popular gardening technique that can reduce 
pest problems in a variety of ways. Some good 
companion plants, such as dill, fennel, and 
Queen Anne's lace, will attract beneficial 
insects. Other types of companion plants repel 
pests or confuse and confound insects or dis­
ease organisms in search of their preferred 
host plants. To learn more about how diver­
sity helps reduce pest problems, see “Encour­
age Diversity" on page 6.
Nutrients for 
Plant Deficiencies
I
f your plants can't get the nutrients they 
need from the soil, they may show a wide 
range of deficiency symptoms, from yellow­
ing leaves to stunted growth. Once you iden­
tify what is lacking (by close observation of 
the plant or by a soil or plant tissue test), you 
can choose from a wide range of organic 
fertilizers to supply the needed nutrient. The 
table below lists some commonly deficient 
plant nutrients and fertilizers that can sup­
ply them.
Nutrient
Sources
Nitrogen
Alfalfa meal 
Blood meal 
Fish emulsion 
Fish meol 
Guono
Soybean meal
Phosphorus
Bonemeal
Colloidal phosphate 
Rock phosphate
Potassium
Granite meal 
Greensand 
Sul-Po-Mag 
Wood ashes
Magnesium
Epsom salts 
Dolomitic lime
Calcium
Gypsum 
Calcific Ilm© 
Oyster shells
Sulfur
Flowers of sulfur 
Gypsum
Boron
Borax
Other
Kelp or seaweed extract
micronutrienls
Kelp meal

412 
■ 
CULTURAL CONTROLS
Plant Health Tonics
A
lthough they are not pesticides, kelp, sea­
weed, and micronutrient sprays can help 
make plants more pest resistant by improv­
ing their overall health. Often described as 
growth enhancers, these products provide 
an extensive menu of nutrients such as iron 
and boron that plants need, In very small 
amounts, for proper growth and development.
Plants con absorb these micronutrients 
through their leaves. So if deficiency symp­
toms appear, applying a foliar spray such as 
a chelated iron product or seaweed will pro­
vide a quick remedy. (The long-term solution 
is to add soil amendments to correct the 
problem.) Those products made with sea­
weed or kelp can also be categorized as 
growth regulators, since they contain amino 
acids and enzymes that promote stronger 
growth and increase plant yields.
If you know from experience that certain 
plants will face challenges from insects and 
diseases, you con apply seaweed or kelp 
sprays to strengthen those plants and make 
them better oble to defend themselves. These 
products, however, are not a substitute for 
good soil or nutrients token up by plant roots.
If you have access to fresh seaweed, 
rinse it to remove the salt, then apply it to the 
garden os a mulch, or compost it. Gardeners 
who don't have access to fresh seaweed can 
buy liquid seaweed extract. Before spraying 
it on your plants, dilute this concentrated 
product according to the directions on the 
label. Spray plants every two to four weeks, 
depending on the label directions. Remem­
ber: A little is good for your plants, but too 
much can be toxic, so don't be tempted to 
spray more frequently or use stronger solutions. 
Dried seaweed, sold as kelp meal, is a good 
long-term soil conditioner; apply 1 -2 pounds 
per 100 square feet of soil.
Keep Things Clean
Keeping a clean garden means prevent­
ing pest-infested material from getting in and 
doing as much as possible to get rid of plants 
or parts of plants that develop pest problems. 
Carefully inspect any plants you intend to buy 
for signs of insects or disease. See “Buying 
Healthy Plants’ on page 4 for advice. And if 
pest problems do strike in your garden, use 
care in disposing of the diseased or infested 
material.
If you save your own seeds, you can try 
various heat or cold treatments to “clean" the 
seeds for next year’s crops. Do not save seeds 
from plants that show symptoms of Fusarium 
or Verticillium wilts or any disfiguring virus. 
All seeds contain living cells capable of har­
boring these microscopic pathogens. If you 
save seeds from your healthiest, most robust 
plants, you are also practicing natural selection, 
and the resulting plants may be more tolerant 
of pathogens than preceding generations.
When the gardening season ends, you’ll 
want to thoroughly clear any diseased plant 
material out of your garden beds. Otherwise, 
come the following spring, it can serve as a 
source of infection for new plants. In some 
cases, you can safely compost diseased plant 
material. In other cases, it’s best to destroy it 
by burning or disposing of it in sealed contain­
ers with your household trash.
You may also want to till or cultivate the 
soil in garden beds that are cleared out in the 
fall to help reduce pest problems. Tilling exposes 
soil pests to the surface, where they may be 
killed by cold temperatures or spotted and 
eaten by predators.
Resistance
In 1859, Charles Darwin noted that in 
nature only the fittest will survive, describing 
the ongoing process of natural selection. All 
plants and animals are subject to a variety of

RESISTANCE 
■ 
413
Pathogen-Free Potting Soil
(
'  etting your seedlings and transplants oft 
J to a good start is a critical step in creat­
ing a healthy, productive garden. Seedlings 
and young plants are prone to a number of 
so Iborne diseases, commonly lumped together 
under the term damping-off. Using a disease- 
free medium is a basic part of producing 
healthy young plants.
If you make your own potting medium, 
esoecially out of ingredients such as garden 
so;l, you will probably want to pasteurize it. 
Exposure to temperatures from 160°-180°F 
for 30 minutes will kill most insects, weed 
sesds, and pathogenic bacteria and fungi. 
Higher temperatures, however, can also destroy 
beneficial organisms, deplete soil organic 
matter, and release toxic salts into the soil; 
monitor soil temperature carefully during 
treatment.
You can pasteurize your potting mix 
indoors in a conventional oven or microwave, 
or outdoors on a barbecue grill. Be aware, 
though, that heating soil will create a strong 
odor. If you're concerned about the smell 
lin Bering in your house, try the outdoor method. 
Af er treating the soil let it cool before you 
use it, or store it in o closed container.
■ 
Conventional oven. Fill a clean, shal­
low pan with moist soil. Cover the pan with 
aluminum foil, insert a meat thermometer
into the soil, and place the pan in an oven 
heated to 200°F. Start riming when the soil 
temperature reaches 140°F und continue heat­
ing for 30 minutes. Remember that the soil 
temperature should not exceed 180°F; if 
necessary, remove the pan from the oven and 
let it cool to below 180°F before returning it 
to the oven, or add a small amount of cool 
water to the soil to moderate the temperature.
■ Microwave oven. Be sure your soil is 
moist and free of stones and metallic particles. 
Put it in a polypropylene baking bag or a 
microwave-safe mixing bowl-in either case, 
the container should not be tightly sealed. At 
low power (30 -40  percent), adequate heat­
ing may take 10-15 minutes of operation. At 
full power, heating will take about Th min­
utes for a 2-pound batch. If you see any 
sparks, stop the process immediately; this 
indicates that metallic particles are present 
in the soil. In this case, use another method,
■ Outdoor barbecue grill. Fill a clean, 
shallow pan with soil. Set the pan over the 
fire of an outdoor barbecue grill. Insert a 
meat thermometer into the soil. When the 
thermometer registers 140°F, begin timing, 
and keep the soil over the heat for 30 more 
minutes. If the soil temperature threatens to 
exceed 180°F, add a small amount of cool 
water to the soil to moderate the temperature.
hazards, including attack by insects and dis­
ease organisms. Those plants and animals that 
have natural mechanisms to cope with pests 
will live and reproduce more generations of 
healthy specimens. Those that cant cope don’t 
survive to reproduce—a fact that is some­
times painfully evident in the garden.
The plants in your home and garden are 
the products of both natural and artificial
selection. Plant breeders have accelerated nat­
ural selection. They select plants for resistance 
to damage caused by insects, diseases, and 
nematodes. The results are new plant culti­
vars with the ability to withstand some of the 
natural hazards in the garden.
Keep in mind that, in general, plants native 
to your area may have more natural pest 
resistance than exotic species. Plants will also

414 
■ 
CULTURAL CONTROLS
Resistance Ratings
I
mproved pest resistance is a strong trend 
in newer cultivars. It is among the most 
potent tools available for keeping plants free 
of insects and disease. When you are choos­
ing plants for your garden, keep in mind that 
some plants are more resistant thon others. 
The following are ratings for the level of de­
fense plants exhibit when challenged by a 
specific problem.
■ Susceptible indicates that the spe­
cies or cultivar is at high risk to a specific 
pest or pathogen. When that insect or dis­
ease is present, it will attack a susceptible 
plant first, injuring or killing the plant and 
greatly reducing yield.
■ Tolerant means that the species or 
cultivar can produce a good crop despite an 
attack by an insect or disease. The plant can, 
however, produce an even better crop if it is 
not subject to attack.
■ Resistant species or cultivars can fight 
off attacks by specific enemies and are gen­
erally not infected or damaged. Choosing a 
resistant plant is a good first step in reducing 
the need for pest control. For example, if you 
know from past experience that early blight 
commonly attacks potatoes In your area, you 
can plant a resistant cultivar such as 'Kenne­
bec' the following year. This greatly reduces 
the chance of early blight damaging your 
crop, ond you probably won't have to do any 
spraying.
■ Immune means the plant is incapa­
ble of being damaged by a certain pest or 
disease. If, for example, one of your garden 
beds contains the club root fungus, you can 
still grow mony kinds of plants there. Only 
cabbage family plants can get club root; all 
other plants are immune.
have more natural resistance when they are 
grown in the appropriate site. For example, 
when azaleas or rhododendrons are grown in 
partial shade and acidic soil and are kept con­
tinuously mulched, they are more pest-resistant 
than when grown in full sun surrounded by 
moisture-grabbing grass. The latter situation 
subjects the plants to problems that do not 
occur in their natural setting—and for which 
they have developed no inherent resistance.
Host Resistance
Some plants have true resistance, which 
means they have an active physiological or 
mechanical means of fending off pests. Plants 
with physiological resistance produce antibi­
otics or other toxic compounds to inhibit pests. 
Plants with mechanical resistance have physi­
cal features that make pest attack difficult. 
Their defense may be a thick outer coating 
that resists penetration by a disease organism 
or a coat of long and stiff hairs that deters 
insect feeding. For example, shell beans and 
peas that have tough pods are more difficult 
for curculios to penetrate; corn that produces 
a husk that reaches past the tip of the ear is 
less likely to be bothered by corn earworms 
and birds.
Some plants have apparent resistance. 
This means that they can withstand attack by 
pests by growing rapidly, maturing early, or 
being very vigorous. Others are merely toler­
ant of invasion—they continue growing even 
when besieged by the enemy, as long as other 
conditions remain favorable. Some tolerate 
more damage than others.
Breeders search for these defensive abili­
ties among wild plants that are related to our 
crops. They may also search for desirable char­
acteristics among cultivars of foreign or heir­
loom plants (those plants that have been 
selected and saved for many generations). 
Sometimes, breeders will induce mutations in

CROP ROTATION 
■ 
415
the laboratory, then breed the desirable char­
acteristics into a new cultivar.
Autocidal Resistance
Some forms of pest resistance involve 
changing the pest rather than the host plant. 
The best example of autocidal resistance is 
the sterile male technique used to control 
insects. Scientists rear thousands of males of a 
particular insect species under controlled 
conditions, then sterilize them with x-rays. 
These sterilized males are released in the wild 
to mate with females of the same species. 
Since the males are sterile, mated females do 
not produce eggs, causing populations to drop 
drastically over tim e. (The technique is 
restricted to insect species with females that 
only mate once.) This method is most suc­
cessful when the sterile males compete aggres­
sively with the natural population of fertile 
m ales. A working exam ple of autocidal 
resistance occurs at the border of Mexico and 
California, where sterile males of the Mexi­
can fruit fly are released to help control popu­
lations and to prevent the pests from entering 
California.
Resistance in the Garden
There are several points to remember for 
making the best use of resistance for avoiding 
pest problems.
■ When skimming through seed catalogs, 
select cultivars with resistance to the pests 
common in your garden. Seed suppliers indi­
cate a cultivars resistant characteristics with 
a series of abbreviated codes. Look for a key 
to the codes in each catalog for help in de­
ciphering listings.
■ When saving seed from your garden 
plants, collect seed only from the healthiest 
and most vigorous specimens. Select plants 
that seemed to naturally resist or tolerate pest
attack, and those that were unattractive to 
your key pests.
■ Keep records of the cultivars that were 
most successful in your garden. In subsequent 
seasons, include the same cultivars in your 
rotation for as long as they remain trouble-free.
■ Try new cultivars. Just as plants are 
constantly changing, so are the pests. Plants 
that were once resistant may be vulnerable to 
pests that have adapted in order to feed on 
formerly resistant plants.
■ Sample heirloom cultivars for resis­
tance. Heirloom plants that have been care­
fully selected and cultivated for many genera­
tions also may contain high levels of pest 
resistance. Some heirloom tomato cultivars, 
for example, have been screened and selected 
by gardeners for such a long time that they are 
naturally resistant to diseases such as Verticil­
lium and Fusarium wilts.
■ Check with your local Cooperative 
Extension office to find out which cultivars 
are recommended for your area. Resistance 
for particular plants works better in some loca­
tions than in others.
Crop Rotation
Crop rotation is one of the most effective 
ways to control insect and disease pests in an 
organic garden. The theory of crop rotation is 
simple. Disease organisms such as club root 
fungi attack and grow in a crop during the 
growing season. During the winter, the organ­
isms may overwinter as spores in the soil or in 
plant litter. The following year, they reinfest a 
new planting. So if you plant cabbage in the 
same spot year after year, the pathogens can 
continue to build their populations and club 
root will become an increasingly serious prob­
lem. However, if you plant cabbage in a bed 
one year, corn there the next, onions the third

416 
■ 
CULTURAL CONTROLS
year, and beans the fourth year, many of the 
club root fungi will die off due to the lack of 
food. When you plant cabbage there again, 
you'll have little problem with club root.
This theory unfortunately becomes more 
complex as the number of crops you wish to 
grow increases. If you grow a large variety of 
crops, planning your rotation may leave your 
mind spinning as well as your crops. Don't 
despair! Just follow the steps and tips below.
Steps in Rotation Planning
In order to plan a rotation, you need 
some working knowledge of how botanical 
names of plants indicate relationships. All plants 
have a two-part botanical name, consisting of 
a genus name and a species name. For example, 
the botanical name of cucumber is Cucumis 
sativus. Cucumis is the genus name, sativus 
is the specific epithet. Together these make 
up the species name, Cucumis sativus.
A genus is a group of fairly closely related 
organisms, a species is an individual organism 
in the group. Many disease organisms can 
attack more than one member of a genus. 
Following through with our example, musk- 
melons, Cucumis melo, belong to the same 
genus as cucumbers and are subject to many 
of the same pest problems.
Some pests attack even a broader spec­
trum of plants. Plant families are larger group­
ings of plants that contain several genera. 
Cucumbers and melons belong to the family 
Cucurbitaceae. This family also includes sum­
mer squash and winter squash, which belong 
to the genus Cucurbita. It’s important to know 
and understand these relationships, because 
one of the basic principles in planning a crop 
rotation is to plant crops from different fami­
lies in sequence in a particular location to pre­
vent the buildup of pest populations in the soil.
Keep family relationships in mind as you 
follow these steps.
1. Take a crop inventory. On index cards 
or small scraps of paper, list the crops you 
plan to grow. Use one card for each crop. 
Next, place the cards in major groups accord­
ing to botanical family. Related crops (such as 
cabbage, cauliflower, and broccoli in the cab­
bage family; onions, leeks, and garlic in the 
lily family; or potatoes, tomatoes, and pep­
pers in the nightshade family) will be in the 
same group. Grouping by family is only one of 
several ways to plan your rotation.
2. Design your garden. Work with a map 
of your garden in front of you. Divide your 
garden into several sections of approximately 
equal size and shape. The number of sections 
should be the same as the number of plant 
groups in step 1. Although the sections need 
not all be the same size, your plans will be 
simplified if they are. Sections may consist of 
several rows, a series of beds, or separate 
corners of the garden area.
3. Arrange your cards. Using the rules 
below, decide on an annual ordering sequence 
of plant groups that will place each crop at it’s 
most advantageous position. For example, if 
your major crop groups are legumes, grains, 
peppers/tomatoes, salad greens, and alliums, 
you could create the following yearly order: 
year 1, legumes; year 2, grains; year 3, peppers/ 
tomatoes; year 4, greens; year 5, alliums. In 
this case, nitrogen-fixing legumes precede 
grains, such as corn, which benefit most from 
the additional nitrogen. Alliums, such as onions, 
were placed last in the five-year sequence 
because they’re good nutrient scavengers. The 
placement of peppers/tomatoes and greens is 
less obvious and less restricted. Perhaps you 
know from experience that peppers and toma­
toes do well following corn. Afterward, a fall 
application of compost will boost the greens 
the following year. Within each section, five 
years will pass before the crop is grown again, 
to discourage pests specific to that plant family.

&
___ jO jw faeS
'Bed 
Yhxrnber
Gardeners use crop rotation to separate related plants by both space and time, thereby removing the 
host plants that pests and diseases need to survive. In this illustration, plants are rotated by family; 
other rotation plans might organize crops by growth habit, space requirements, or time of maturity.
417
Copyrighted material

418 
■ 
CULTURAL CONTROLS
4. Place crop groups in their garden 
sections. Assign a plant family to each of your 
garden sections. Then subdivide the sections 
to accommodate the plants in each family 
group. For example, designate space for snap 
beans, snow peas, and lima beans in the sec­
tion reserved for legumes.
5. Make plans for future gardens. In each 
subsequent year, move on to the next plant 
group in each garden section. In year 2. for 
example, grains follow the legumes grown in 
section 1 in the first year, while section 3 is 
planted with greens.
Rules for Rotation
■ Alternate crops as many ways as possi­
ble. Plants may be grouped by families, as dis­
cussed earlier in the chapter. Alternately, you 
could choose to arrange your crops by the 
amount of space they require, by growth habit 
(root crops or vining crops), or by some other 
criterion.
■ Leave as much time as you can spare 
between related crops. Placing related crops 
three to six years apart in a rotation is impor­
tant to effectively break disease and insect 
cycles.
■ Include soil-improving crops. Leave 
room for soil-builders such as buckwheat, rye, 
or oats. With a little more space, you can grow 
clover or alfalfa, which remains in place for 
more than one year, enriching the soil and 
attracting beneficial insects. Sod crops, such 
as lawns, cover crops, or even weeds that are 
intact for several years, however, may harbor 
soil pests such as grubs or wireworms, which 
can damage root crops. Avoid crops such as 
potatoes and onions the first year after sod is 
plowed under.
■ Grow legumes before grains. Nitrogen- 
fixing crops, including alfalfa, clover, beans, 
and peas, will boost the growth of most suc­
ceeding crops.
■ Apply compost or manure to those crops 
that need it most. Some crops prefer to feast 
on the leftovers of nutrients applied the previ­
ous year. This list includes members of the 
cabbage family, solanaceous plants such as 
tomatoes and potatoes, most root crops, and 
leafy crops like spinach and lettuce. Other 
crops, including squash family members, corn, 
and other grains, and legumes such as peas 
and beans prefer a fresh application of com­
post or manure each year.
■ Some crops, including onions, lettuce, 
and squash, seem to benefit any planting that 
follows them. In general, most crops grow 
poorly when planted after carrots, beets, and 
members of the cabbage family.
■ Plant heavy-feeding crops such as com, 
tomatoes, and cabbage the season before light- 
feeders such as root vegetables, bulb crops, 
and herbs. Plant a soil-building crop in the 
third season.
■ Make efficient use of garden space by 
planting overwintering annuals such as spinach, 
parsnips, and garlic after crops that are har­
vested in late summer.
■ Although perennials such as asparagus 
and rhubarb remain in the same place each 
year, rotate the cover crops that surround them, 
or rotate different kinds of mulch.
■ If you find it impossible to rotate crops, 
at least rotate cultivars.
■ Certain soilborne diseases attack a 
broad spectrum of crops, and a more complex 
rotation is necessary to prevent infection. For 
example, the bacterium Pseudomonas margi- 
nalis can cause rots of lettuce, beans, cucum­
bers, and potatoes. If your garden is home to 
this disease organism, you may have to make 
it the sole focus of your rotation. Separate the 
susceptible crops by as much time as possible 
within your rotation.
■ Be prepared to change your plans if 
this year's problems threaten crops planned 
for next season's rotation.
Copyrighted m

COMPANION PI ANTING 
■ 
419
■ 
Record your successes and failures, and 
review the list each time you plan a crop 
rotation.
Companion Planting
Organic gardeners often use companion 
planting to prevent pest damage and ensure a 
healthy harvest. The idea is that having a 
diverse grouping of plants growing side-by- 
side, where only one type grew before, will 
reduce the pest problems of one or more of 
the crops. Companion planting offers protec­
tion only from insect pests: there is little evi­
dence that companion planting can control 
disease.
Mixed planting mimics a natural ecosys­
tem. Your garden is like a mini-forest in which 
hundreds of organisms interact among the 
trees, usually out of sight. While plants remain 
stationary, insects and microbial organisms 
are moving in and out of the forest daily. By 
planting a diversity of crops in your garden 
forest, you can tip the scale in favor for vigor­
ous growth and minimum damage by selec­
tively attracting certain organisms and repel­
ling others.
Gardens are good places in which to try 
companion planting, since gardeners may be 
less concerned with high yields and efficiency 
than are commercial growers. Rower beds 
often contain an array of species and cultivars, 
while stiffly regimented rows of identical plants 
fill most vegetable gardens. Combining the 
two creates a diverse planting that pleases the 
eye as well as the ecosystem. Mix companion 
plants in among your vegetables, or use them 
as a border.
The term companion planting describes 
several types of plant-to-organism relationships. 
These relationships, and how to use them, are 
described below. While examples are given, 
they are by no means a complete selection of 
possible companion plants. You'll probably 
want to do further reading and experimenting
to discover the full range of companion plant­
ing possibilities for your garden.
Attractant Crops
Attractant crops tend to attract organisms, 
usually insects, in a way that benefits your 
yard and garden. Many beneficial insects that 
prey on garden pests supplement their diets 
with pollen and nectar produced by small- 
flowered plants: most beneficials are tiny and 
can't reach the food in larger blossoms. Plants 
in the carrot (Umbelliferae), daisy (Composi- 
tae), and mint (Labiatae) families are espe­
cially attractive to beneficial insects. Once 
good insects are attracted to your garden, 
they'll often stay to control garden pests. Mix 
the following attractant plants among your 
garden crops, or plant them in a border to 
greet the beneficials as they arrive: caraway, 
catnip, dill, fennel, hyssop, lemon balm, lovage, 
parsley, rosemary, thyme, and yarrow.
Repellent Crops
Some plants make good companions be­
cause of the company they discourage. While 
these relationships remain more a part of gar­
dening folklore than scientific fact, many gar­
deners are convinced of their usefulness. Both 
catnip and tansy, for example, reportedly repel 
green peach aphids and squash bugs from sus­
ceptible garden crops. Wormwood (Artemi­
sia absinthium}. southernwood (A. abrotanum). 
and tomatoes are said to repel flea beetles 
from cabbage family plants. Plant radishes 
amid hills of cucumber and squash to repel 
cucumber beetles, and you'll also limit the 
diseases spread by these pests.
Good Neighbors
Certain plant combinations succeed be­
cause of differences in nutritional needs, space 
requirements, or harvest times. These associ­
ations may not directly retard pest damage, 
but they do promote plant health.
Interplanting certain crops fills precious

4 2 0  
■ 
C l'L T l'R A L  C O N T R O L S
garden space efficiently without creating com­
petition for light or nutrients. Corn and lettuce, 
for example, have different nutritional needs, 
rooting patterns, and pests. Lettuce fills the 
empty space between corn plants and is pro­
tected from the full glare of the summer sun 
by the towering corn stalks.
Other plants harmonize because they 
mature at different times. Radish and carrot 
seeds are often sown together; the larger rad­
ish seeds mark the row as you plant, and the 
quick-emerging radish seedlings hold the soil 
against rain for the slower-growing carrots. 
You'll harvest the radishes long before the 
carrots need the space to fatten.
Legumes such as alfalfa, clover, and vetch 
work with beneficial bacteria to convert atmo­
spheric nitrogen gas into a form usable by 
plants, some of which is available to plants 
grown around them or after they are harvested. 
While often viewed as a weed in lawns, white 
clover actually helps supply nitrogen to the 
grass around it.
Still other plants seem to enhance the 
growth of plants growing near them. Basil is 
popular among gardeners who practice com­
panion planting—they say that everything 
planted near it grows vigorously.
Patterns to Avoid
On the other hand, some crop combina­
tions should be avoided in the interest of pre­
venting pests. Crops that are closely related 
attract the same pests, and you may wish to 
separate them in your beds.
Some plants are allelopathic, which means 
they inhibit the growth of plants growing nearby. 
Their roots secrete substances that are toxic 
to a wide range of other plants. For example, a 
shallow-plowed cover crop of rye will inhibit 
the germination of small-seeded plants and 
weeds. Yellow and giant foxtail, nutsedge, 
quackgrass. sunflowers, and walnut trees all 
have allelopathic properties. Keep these rela­
tionships in mind if you're puzzling over a 
mysterious plant disorder that seems to be 
caused by invisible pests. The pest may actu­
ally be the large walnut tree growing nearby.
Timed Planting
Timed planting and harvesting are two of 
the oldest known pest-control methods. Using 
this method, gardeners either plant (or har­
vest) a crop earlier or later than usual in order 
to avoid the most damaging pest stages.
In earlier times, this type of information 
was passed from old to new generations within 
fairly stable communities. Modern gardeners, 
being part of a more mobile society, may find 
themselves in new environments where they 
don't know what planting schedule to follow 
to foil the local pests. Experimenting with new 
crops in a new setting, you may discover a whole 
new array of pests. If you're gardening in a 
new area, or if you haven't tried timing your 
growing schedule before, try the approaches 
described below.
Learn New Ways to Tell Time
The calendars in our homes and offices 
are useful tools for scheduling our time. Crop 
plants and pests, however, follow a different 
schedule and develop according to soil and 
air temperatures, which can vary yearly. In 
the northeastern states, for example, a snow­
storm or sunny, warm weather is equally likely 
on the first day of spring.
Degree Days
To a large extent, temperature regulates 
pest development. Scientists use units of 
measurements called degree days to track heat 
accumulation over time and predict the local 
appearance of various pests. The degree day 
formula assigns a value to each day’s maxi­
mum and minimum temperature and com­

TIM HI) PLANTING 
■ 
421
pares that value—the degree day or heat 
unit—to the temperature at which a particu­
lar pest begins to develop. Units accumulate 
daily, starting from a known or readily deter­
mined point in the pest's life cycle. If the pest 
is a caterpillar, for example, degree day units 
might be calculated from the first day its adult 
stage (moth) appears.
Using this formula, entomologists pre­
dict when each pest will emerge from hiber­
nation and begin laying eggs on your plants. If 
temperatures are lower than normal, degree 
days accumulate more slowly and pests develop 
later. If temperatures are higher than normal, 
pests develop more quickly and you can expect 
to see them earlier than usual. Your Coopera­
tive Extension office can provide you with 
local pest emergence predictions based on 
this formula. Use such information to sched­
ule planting, harvesting, and preventive 
treatments.
Phenological Signals
Another way to tell time in the garden is 
by keeping track of local plant signals. Some 
gardeners can predict when a certain pest will 
emerge by watching the growth of flowering 
trees and shrubs and relating their develop­
ment to that of the pest. This study of the 
timing of biological events and their relation­
ship to one another is known as phenology. 
For example, you may observe that flea bee­
tles appear when local lilacs begin to bloom. 
If you study and record these relationships 
over time, you may be able to use your obser­
vations to time plantings of crops to avoid 
pest attack.
Pheromone traps that mimic pests own 
signals are useful tools for monitoring insect 
appearances. They can help you determine 
when the first pests arrive and when the popu­
lation dwindles. The directions supplied with 
specific commercial traps explain how to inter­
pret the population fluctuations. See “Phero­
mone Traps" on page 437 for details on using 
these traps.
Experiment for Success
To time planting dates accurately, begin 
collecting your own garden data. Each season, 
review your notes to detect patterns, then 
adjust your garden schedule accordingly. Keep 
track of the first date on which a particular 
pest appears, the coinciding botanical signals, 
and the last date you see it.
Experiment with successive plantings. Try 
several sowings of carrots, for example, to see 
which planting date is most effective for avoid­
ing carrot rust fly infestation. Many gardeners 
find that delayed planting works best to con­
trol this pest. Sweet com growers often plant 
in succession to ensure a weekly harvest and 
find that corn planted earlier escapes attack 
by corn earworms or European com borers. 
As a gardener, you may decide to limit corn 
planting to the earliest part of the season in 
order to beat the pests in the race to the ears.
When arranging your planting and har­
vesting schedule, include cultivars that mature 
earlier or later than your usual crop selections. 
Pests arrive to find their favorite plant hosts 
have already been harvested or are not mature 
enough to produce the fruit on which they feed. 
Either way, damage to your garden is reduced 
or eliminated and pest populations dwindle in 
the absence of the appropriate hosts.
In areas where nematodes are common in 
the soil, plant susceptible crops extra early or 
extra late to take advantage of lower soil 
temperatures. Most nematodes cant pene­
trate plant roots when soil temperatures are 
below 64°H
Here are some other examples of crops 
and pests for which timed planting is effective.
■  
Peas. Cool, wet weather conditions 
encourage the development of many fungal 
diseases. If you live in an area with cool, wet

422 
■ 
CULTURAL CONTROLS
fall weather, you may want to plant peas only 
in the spring. And if damping-off and root rot 
trouble your springtime seedlings, delay next 
spring's planting by a few weeks.
■  Tomatoes. If your plants tend to suc­
cumb to late blight near the end of the season, 
replace them in your next rotation with culti­
vars that mature earlier.
■  Cabbage family crops. In the North, 
plant radishes, broccoli, and other cabbage 
family crops early to avoid cabbage maggot 
damage to roots. If cabbage maggots persist, 
grow these crops for fall harvest to avoid 
the pest.
■  Onions. Plant them early to reduce 
damage caused by onion maggots. The first 
generation of adult flies usually appears as 
dandelions begin blooming. Onions that are 
already nearing maturity when pests arrive 
have greater resistance to injury than tiny 
seedlings.
Sanitation
Good sanitation is a crucial step in keep­
ing most pests under control. Any pathogen 
that persists in soil from year to year, as do 
root knot nematodes, Fusarium wilts, tobacco 
mosaic virus, and many others, can be spread 
via contaminated tools, infected or infested 
plant debris, or even your hands. Make thor­
ough cleaning of shovels, digging forks, or the 
tines of your tiller part of your gardening 
routine, especially if soil-dwelling pests and 
pathogens are present in sections of your 
garden.
Before You Begin
The temptation to get a quick start in the 
spring may lead gardeners to skip sanitation 
efforts that help prevent later problems. Before 
you take your first steps onto the newly awak­
ening soil, stop and remember these impor­
tant rules.
Keep the gardener clean. Because gar­
deners love to touch, smell, and investigate 
plants, they often unwittingly spread pest 
problems. They meander through their friends 
gardens or visit local nurseries and farms brush­
ing against infected plants and picking up 
soilborne spores on their boots. If you're among 
the ranks of such plant admirers, make sure 
your shoes and hands are clean before you 
enter your own garden. If you've been near 
potential sources of pathogens or insects, rinse 
your boots with a 10 percent bleach solution 
(1 part bleach to 9 parts water).
Start with clean tools. And keep them 
that way. Especially when working among dis­
eased plants, rinse your tools with isopropyl 
alcohol or a 10 percent bleach solution before 
moving on to another part of the garden. When 
pruning infected trees or shrubs, disinfect prun- 
ers between cuts. When your work is finished, 
clean your tools again and let them air-dry, 
then coat them lightly with oil before storing.
Sterilize saved seeds. Disease organisms 
may linger invisibly on seeds you plan to save, 
ready to infect next year's emerging seedlings. 
Make a sterilizing dip to protect seeds from 
overwintering diseases. Place seeds on a large 
square of cheesecloth, gather the edges of the 
cloth together, and bind them with string or a 
rubber band. Dip the seeds in a solution of 
either vinegar and water (1 tablespoon apple- 
cider vinegar to 1 quart water) or a 10 per­
cent bleach solution. Dry dipped seeds on 
newspaper or paper towels; make sure seeds 
are completely dry before storing.
You can also sterilize seeds with heat by 
immersing them in hot water. Take care if you 
use this method. Excessive heat can kill seeds 
and will usually reduce germination percen­
tage. It's safer to use a large quantity— several 
gallons—of water to minimize the possibility 
of a sudden surge in temperature.
Heat water in a large pot to the correct 
temperature (see below). Place seeds in the

SANITATION 
■ 
423
center of a large square of cheesecloth, gather 
the edges together, and tie securely. Suspend 
the seeds in the water; don't let them rest on 
the bottom of the pot. Stir the water frequently 
during immersion. Use a good-quality ther­
mometer to measure the water temperature, 
and time the immersion carefully. Don't try to 
store seeds after hot-water treatment; the treat­
ment will have started the germination process. 
You can treat the following seeds at the speci­
fied times and temperatures.
■ Brussels sprouts, cabbage, peppers, 
tomatoes— 122°F; 25 minutes.
■ Beets, broccoli, carrots, cauliflower, 
kale, kohlrabi, turnips— 122°F 20 minutes.
■ Celery—118°E 30 minutes.
■ Eggplant—122°R 30 minutes.
Choose healthy plants. Inspect new plants 
before introducing them to your yard or garden. 
Look for signs of disease and insects, and 
reject any that look suspicious. If available, 
buy certified disease-free plants and seeds. 
Inquire about seed sterilization practices at 
your seed source. Buy from suppliers that use 
sanitation procedures and heat-sterilizing tech­
niques instead of synthetic chemicals to con­
trol disease on nursery stock and seeds.
Don't be afraid to buy sight-unseen from 
reputable mail-order nurseries. Most plants 
that are sold mail-order across state lines must 
be inspected and certified disease-free before 
they are packaged and shipped. When buying 
plants such as strawberries or raspberries, which 
often carry viral diseases, buy from a special­
ized producer who employs highly effective 
modern screening methods. Such growers are 
most likely to offer a wide selection of disease- 
free plants and are more likely to back up their 
sales with guarantees should your new plants 
show disease symptoms.
Solarize the soil. If you anticipate pest
problems in a garden section that must be 
planted, you can use the sun’s heat to kill 
some pathogens and insects in the soil. Stretch 
a sheet of clear plastic tightly over a smooth, 
moist soil surface and leave it in place for as 
long as several weeks. The heat that builds up 
in the covered soil will kill most soilborne 
pathogens and weed seeds.
Start a compost pile. A well-managed 
hot compost pile can be the perfect resting 
site for plant trimmings and other garden debris 
that may carry unseen pathogens and insect 
stages in waiting. See “Composting for Insect 
and Disease Control’’ on page 425 for instruc­
tions on composting.
Remove winter mulches. As temperatures 
begin to rise and spring rains start falling, 
soggy winter mulch provides a harbor for dis­
ease pathogens and hungry slugs or snails. 
Pull the mulch from beds a little at a time; pay 
special attention to clearing it away from tree 
trunks, stems, and crowns.
As You Garden
Maintain your sanitation standards consis­
tently throughout the growing season. Cultural 
controls are especially useful in midsummer 
when beneficial insects are active and garden 
crops are nearing maturity. Keep problems at 
bay by adding a few more sanitation tech­
niques to your garden plan.
Stay away when it’s wet. Some plant dis­
ease organisms are just waiting for a free ride 
on your clothing and hands. Don’t cooperate! 
Most diseases need only a thin film of water to 
spread from one plant to the next. During 
warm, rainy spells, disease transmission is at 
its greatest.
Rogue and prune. Pull plants with symp­
toms of disease or heavy insect infestation 
and prune diseased sections from perennial 
plants. A hot compost pile will kill pathogenic 
fungi and bacteria. If you suspect viral 
infections, bury the prunings in an out-of-the-

4 2 4  
■ 
e t  i;n RAI. CONTRC >LS
Soil Solarization
I
f soilborne pesfs are a big problem in your 
garden, why waste your energy trying to 
combat them? Let the sun do it for you! This 
process, known as soil solarization, involves 
covering the soil with clear plastic, so the 
heat can build up and destroy the soil organ­
ism s and weed seeds. Keep in mind that the 
high temperatures can also harm beneficial 
insects and organisms that live in the soil; 
only use this process when you have a seri­
ous pest or disease problem.
Soil solarization works best in midsummer, 
just before foil crops are planted. It is also 
most effective in areas that have long stretches 
of clear, hot weather. If you have a rainy or 
cool spell during the solarization period, soil 
temperatures may not stay high enough to 
kill off pathogens.
Prepare the site as you would for planting,
removing old crop residues, working in any 
soil amendments, ond raking it into planting 
rows or beds. Water the site thoroughly, and 
dig a trench a few inches deep around the 
edges of the site. Cover the area with a sheet 
of 1 -4 mil clear plastic, and bury the edges 
In the trench to anchor them. Leave in place 
for three to four weeks.
Remove the plastic and plant your crops, 
disturbing the soil as little as possible. Solar- 
ization will only treat the top 3 " - 5 "  of soil, so 
deeper cultivation may bring up pathogens 
and seeds that can reinfest the newly treated 
plot. Since solarizing may also harm the micro­
organisms that help make soil organic matter 
available to plants, you may want to top- 
dress your crops with a microbe-rich material 
such as finished compost.
way area or put them in a sealed bag for 
disposal with the household trash. See "Prun­
ing*' on page 431 for specific suggestions 
on pest problems that you can combat by 
pruning.
Keep the site clean. Before planting a 
second crop, take the time to clean up and 
compost any plant remains. They’ll be returned 
to the garden disease-free.
When You're Done
Some of us lose steam over the season 
and are happy to let things lie until next year, 
but this is no time to take it easy. End-of- 
season garden chores will make next year's 
garden that much healthier.
Prune perennial plants. It’s time again 
for another round of pruning when growth has 
slowed and perennial plants have become dor­
mant. Consult a pruning manual to help you 
determine the best time to trim and shape 
your plants.
Clean your equipment. Give tools a lit­
tle tender loving care before storing them away. 
Clean them with a 10 percent bleach solution, 
wipe them dry, and coat them lightly with 
household oil to prevent rust.
Collect leaves and other plant residues. 
Continue adding to your compost pile for as 
long as you can. If temperatures dip low enough, 
decomposition will slow or stop, but will begin 
again when warmer temperatures return. Com­
mon fall compost ingredients include fruit you 
forgot to harvest, fallen leaves, and plant stems 
and flower stalks.
Remove row covers. If you’re saving row 
covers for next season, dip them in a 10 per­
cent bleach solution, then let them air-dry

COMPOSTING FOR INSECT AND DISEASE CONTROL 
■ 
425
before storage. This is particularly important 
for covers used on related plants and for most 
early spring crops that are susceptible to 
damping-off pathogens.
Composting for Insect 
and Disease Control
Adding compost to your soil offers a sim­
ple, organic control for a variety of soil-dwelling 
pests. By improving the structure, moisture- 
holding capacity, and nutrient content of the 
soil, compost encourages healthy, balanced 
populations of soil organisms. Many of these 
organisms control plant pathogens by feeding 
on them, parasitizing them, or outcompeting 
them for food and water.
Foliar sprays of tea made from mature 
compost act as natural fungicides against the 
early stages of leaf blights, powdery mildew, 
and similar diseases by introducing competitive, 
beneficial microorganisms to infected plants. 
When compost is applied around plants as a 
thin layer of mulch, its beneficial microorga­
nisms may benefit the lower sections of plants 
(when splashed up by rain) as well as the soil.
How to Compost
Recipes for preparing a compost pile 
abound, but only a few factors are essential 
for success. In addition to being a source for 
healthful, organic soil amendments, your com­
post pile can also serve as a place where dis­
eased prunings and insect-infested plants can 
be converted back into usable materials for 
your garden. Follow these steps to create 
your pile.
1. 
Collect materials. Good raw materials 
for com post include garden wastes, grass 
clippings, kitchen scraps, manure, newspapers, 
and sawdust. Avoid meat scraps and oils, both 
of which will attract foraging animals and will
slow decomposition. Save the materials in a sep­
arate pile outdoors, or layer them indoors in a 
5-gallon bucket with a tight-fitting lid: sprin­
kle sawdust or other absorbent material be­
tween layers of kitchen waste to control odors.
2. Shred or chop large pieces. Shredding 
or chopping woody pruning debris, tree bark, 
and newspapers exposes more surface area to 
the decomposing organisms active in compost, 
which helps speed the process.
3. Layer the materials. When you’ve col­
lected enough wastes to fill a space measuring 
approximately 4' on each side, begin layering 
the materials. Your goal is to create a ratio of 
approximately 30 parts carbonaceous materi­
als (dry, yellow or brown, plant-based) to 1 
part nitrogenous materials (wet, green, or 
animal-based). This is achieved with roughly 
equal volumes of dry materials such as leaves, 
straw, sawdust, or paper, and wet materials, 
such as fresh grass clippings o r m anure.
4. Add a compost starter. While layering, 
include several shovelfuls of soil or finished 
compost—this serves to inoculate the pile with 
decomposer organisms naturally present in 
the soil. If no healthy soil or compost is available, 
a commercial compost starter can supply the 
necessary microorganisms. You can also add 
lime or mineral fertilizers, according to the 
needs of your soil. Keep the mixture damp but 
not soggy, sprinkling layers with water, as 
necessary. When finished, cover the pile to 
maintain the proper moisture level.
5. Turn the pile. Every few days, turn the 
pile with a garden fork, fluffing the materials 
as you go. If the pile seems dry, sprinkle with a 
little more water. Turning the pile works oxy­
gen into the mix and hastens decomposition. 
As microbial activity increases, the tempera­
ture will rise. Use a soil or compost thermom­
eter to monitor your com post’s progress. 
Frequent turning helps maintain the proper 
temperature. Hot compost can reach 170°F

426 
■ 
CULTURAL CONTROLS
but try to keep your pile at 160°E Higher 
temperatures tend to kill the organisms impor­
tant for continuing decomposition, while lower 
temperatures allow insect pests and disease 
organisms to survive the composting process.
You’ll know your compost is finished when 
the temperature returns to normal and origi­
nal ingredients are no longer recognizable. 
This can take as little as two weeks, if you turn 
the pile regularly and if adequate nitrogen is 
supplied. Hot composting is necessary to kill 
pests, and only does so when the pile is actively 
heating. If your piles are built slowly and remain 
on the cool to warm side, refrain from adding 
pest-ridden garden wastes, since temperatures 
won’t be high enough to control the pests and 
the resulting compost might reintroduce pests 
and diseases to your garden.
How Compost Controls Pests
The biological activity and heat in a com­
post pile work together to kill off disease organ­
isms and insects.
Temperature. As microbial activity be­
gins and increases, temperatures inside a com­
post pile increase until decom position is 
complete. The pile is hottest at its center, 
where the intense heat can kill disease organ­
isms and insects.
At 120°F nematodes and pathogens caus­
ing Sclerotium rots are killed. At 140°E most 
pathogenic bacteria, fungi, slugs and snails, 
and centipedes are dead; unfortunately, this 
temperature also kills earthworms. Many plant 
viruses and bacteria are killed once the tem­
perature reaches 160°F At temperatures greater 
than 160°E however, important decomposer 
organisms begin to expire. Therefore, if you're 
composting for pest control, maintain the pile 
at 160°E
Competition. Compost piles are like 
“end-of-the-week soup”—they contain a little
bit of everything. This also applies to the organ­
isms that inhabit the compost community. 
Rarely is any one species or group predomi­
nant, because the type and number of organ­
isms present change along with the physical 
and chemical changes that occur as materials 
decompose.
The microbial organisms, insects, spiders, 
earthworms, and related decomposers tend to 
work together to produce finished compost. 
Along the way. however, friends quickly become 
foes and food for one another. In addition, 
researchers have discovered that many bene­
ficial microorganisms are able tooutcom pete 
pathogenic fungi. Still other microorganisms 
may produce toxic substances that inhibit or 
kill the pathogens surrounding them. In a suc­
cessful compost pile, the resulting compost 
contains a balance of organisms, large and 
small, beneficial and pathogenic, so that no 
one organism occurs in sufficient quantities 
to cause damage.
Using Compost for Disease Control
Garden clean-up should include compost­
ing plant residues and wastes that remain at 
the end of the season. Place debris that may 
carry pathogenic organisms in the center of 
the pile where temperatures are greatest. This 
also pertains to stalks, fruit, and leaves that 
may carry overwintering stages of insect pests 
and pathogens.
Mixing finished compost into your gar­
den soil is an excellent way to distribute bene­
ficial microorganisms that will continue working 
against plant pathogens over the season. Sci­
entists also are researching ways to use com­
post extracts to control soilborne diseases. 
When liquid extracts are applied to soil, or 
when seedlings are started in specially pre­
pared compost mixes, beneficial microorga­
nisms are sufficiently aggressive to suppress 
the plant pathogens.

SOIL TILLAGE 
■ 
427
You can try this method at home to con­
trol damping-off and other common soilborne 
diseases. Mix I part finished compost with 6 
parts water. Let the mix stand for one week, 
then strain it through a cloth, such as burlap 
or cheesecloth, and collect the liquid. Spray 
this extract undiluted on seedlings in the green­
house or outdoors to help control many fun­
gal pathogens and prevent infection. Research 
is now focused on creating "custom'* compost 
mixtures that target specific pathogens. Some 
scientists recommend that compost ingredients 
include tree bark, animal manure, or a combi­
nation of the two, if disease control is the 
objective.
Soil Tillage
It makes sense that pests raise their fami­
lies in garden soil. When larvae hatch from 
eggs or adults emerge from pupal cases, they’re 
already seated at the dinner table. Gardeners 
may find this state of affairs very inconvenient, 
but at least they know where to start looking 
for problem pests.
How Tillage Helps
Tillage prepares the soil for planting. 
However, at the same time, it disrupts the life 
cycle of many soil organisms, both beneficial 
and pest. When you till the soil to prepare for 
planting, you disturb insects at their most 
vulnerable stages. Cultivation also upsets the 
nutrient cycles in the soil by mixing in debris 
and minerals and by adding oxygen. Asa result, 
the rates of decomposition and nutrient release 
increase. This change in habitat results in 
many changes within the soil community.
Tillage physically destroys soil animals and 
their shelter, as egg-infested plant debris or hol­
low stalks with pupae inside are tom to smaller 
pieces. Food sources are removed and redis­
tributed throughout the soil, starving some
Fungus-Fighting Tea
I
f your plants are weak and diseased, try 
perking them up with a nice cup of tea- 
compost tea, that is! Just as plant-based 
sprays can be used to repel insects, compost 
tea, made from manure-based compost, may 
help control fungal diseases. Apparently, the 
microorganisms present in compost tea attack 
or outcompete the problem fungi that cause 
such diseases as powdery mildew and Botry­
tis blight, thereby inhibiting their growth.
To make compost tea, place 1 gallon of 
well-aged compost in a 5-gallon bucket, and 
fill with water. Stir well and set in a warm 
place for three days. Filter the mixture through 
a screen or cloth, such as burlap or cheesecloth, 
and return the trapped solids to the compost 
pile or the garden. Place the strained liquid in 
a small sprayer or watering can. Pinch off 
heavily diseased leaves before applying the 
tea to the rest of the plant. For best results, 
use this treatment in the evening, when leaves 
are likely to remain damp for several hours.
Sometimes a single treatment will not 
stop the disease. Check affected plants every 
three to four days and repeat the application 
if the plants still show symptoms. Use any left­
over tea to water plants growing in containers.
insects. Unfortunately, beneficial organisms 
are destroyed along with the rest. When you 
work the soil, you redistribute the pests 
themselves, often leaving them at the surface 
where they’re exposed to predators. Atop the 
soil, eggs dry out. freeze, or overheat. Tillage 
may also bury pests so deeply that they can­
not survive.
The scale of disruption and, therefore, 
the level of pest control, depends on how

428 
■ 
CULTURAL CONTROLS
deeply you work the soil and the equipment 
you use. Rotary tilling is the most destructive 
method but is confined to shallow depths. 
Using hand tools creates much less disturbance.
Tillage fo r Insect Control
The best time to till is when the soil is 
fairly dry and crumbly. Maintaining soil struc­
ture is more important than tilling for pest 
control, so don’t cultivate when the soil is too 
wet or too dry. Working the soil at these times 
can have disastrous effects on soil structure. 
When you till will depend on your local climate. 
If your area has lots of wet, overcast weather 
in fall, put off tilling until spring.
Review the following tilling tips and heed 
those that will help control pests that have 
been a problem in your garden.
■ Before planting, till to control weeds 
that may harbor armyworms, cutworms, and 
tarn ish ed  plant bugs, an d  to d istu rb  co rn  root
aphids.
■ Leave a tilled, dry strip of soil around 
your garden to discourage entry by slugs and 
snails.
■ After harvest, till to control pea weevils, 
root maggots, and tomato homworms and 
pinworms. Fall cultivation also destroys plant 
debris that can shelter overwintering Euro­
pean com borers, flea beetles, squash bugs, 
and other pests.
■ Summer tilling destroys grubs and ex­
poses grasshopper eggs to unfriendly elements. 
However, your garden is not likely to have 
empty spaces that can be easily tilled. Leaving 
a garden fallow for the summer just to control 
insects in the soil is rarely feasible; in addition 
to the lost growing space, the extra tilling
damages soil structure. Cultivating between 
successive crops is sometimes feasible. For 
example, till the soil between spring- and fall- 
planted crops to destroy lingering pests.
Tillage fo r Disease Control
Less attention has been given to control­
ling plant diseases with tillage. In the home 
garden, sanitation followed by hot compost­
ing or disposal of suspicious debris is proba­
bly more effective than cultivation in limiting 
disease organisms. However, on a larger scale 
of production, tillage offers some disease- 
control benefits. California lettuce growers, 
for example, till between crops, using special 
plows that penetrate the soil to a depth of at 
least 10". This deep tillage buries a common 
fungus that causes a serious disease of lettuce 
and prevents the pathogen from infecting suc­
cessive crops.
If You Don’t Till
As tillage decreases, most soil organisms, 
including insect pests, are favored. Organic 
matter and nutrients become concentrated at 
a shallow depth, providing more food and 
cover. Animal life cycles remain undisturbed. 
Pests of seedlings tend to increase in numbers, 
along with earthworms, predaceous ground 
beetles, spiders, and slugs and snails.
Cultivated soil tends to warm up faster in 
the spring, which means that soil-dwelling pests 
emerge earlier. Researchers have found that 
pests may emerge from tilled soil one to two 
weeks earlier than from untilled soil. If your 
garden is just getting started, earlier pest emer­
gence may increase injury to young plants. If 
pests emerge before your crops, however, they 
may look elsewhere for their meals.

PHYSICAL CONTROLS
W h e n  pests appear on plants, the most direct 
way to get rid of them is to pick them off. You 
can also handpick diseased leaves or other 
plant parts, limiting the ability of the infecting 
organism to further colonize them. In some 
cases this simple action effectively “cures” the 
host plants.
Handpicking and other physical controls 
are among the most straightforward and safe 
techniques for protecting plants. Most such 
controls rely on the gardeners ability to remove 
or exclude pests from plants or to lure pests 
away from plants and/or into traps.
The Physical Approach
In general, physical control methods are 
more often used to control insects than to 
control diseases. There is a wide variety of 
traps and barriers that thwart many common 
insect pests. Physical control of disease organ­
isms is limited to removing diseased plant parts 
by hand or with pruning tools.
Keep Your Hand In
Very few insects have mandibles strong 
enough to bite into human skin, although a 
few, such as the striped blister beetle, can 
cause skin irritation if you squash them in 
your hands. Likewise, few plant diseases cause 
corresponding human illnesses. However, you 
can wear rubber gloves when handpicking 
pests if it makes you more comfortable with 
the job. You can also remove some types of 
insects with a small hand-held vacuum, while 
other types can be shaken off a plant onto a 
dropcloth.
Shut Pests Out
You will have fewer problems to hand- 
pick or otherwise control if you use physical 
barriers to keep pests, fungi, or bacteria from 
reaching their favorite hosts. Barriers range 
from a band of diatomaceous earth or wood 
ashes on the soil surface to deter slugs, to 
floating row cover draped over young cucum­
ber plants to prevent cucumber beetles from 
feeding—and transmitting bacterial wilt.
Create a Diversion
Mulches sometimes help keep pests from 
finding the plants they seek. They may keep 
soil-dwelling insects from coming to the soil 
surface to feed, or prevent other pests from 
entering the soil to damage plant roots. Other 
mulches reflect light in ways that disorient 
pests and reduce their feeding. Scientists have 
experimented with different colors of plastic 
mulch and have found that white or alumi­
num foil mulches are particularly confusing 
to thrips.
Set a Trap
Besides the obvious benefits of trapping 
pests, you can use traps to warn of impending 
infestations. If you get early warning of the 
appearance of apple maggots, it will prompt 
you to quickly hang apple maggot traps in 
your trees. Traps like yellow sticky traps attract 
insects with color; other traps use chemicals 
produced by insects (pheromones) or plants 
to lure the insects to the trap.
An older method of capturing destruc­
tive insects is to plant crops that are known to 
be attractive to pests, and then harvest them 
before the pests can move on to other plants.
429

430 
■ 
PHYSICAL CONTROLS
This approach works best when pest popula­
tions are monitored very closely.
While traps and trap crops hold little allure 
for disease organisms, you can use susceptible 
plants to tell you if a disease is present. For 
example, eggplant is very sensitive to Verticil­
lium wilt and is often used to test for the 
presence of the disease. When planted in heav­
ily infested soil, eggplant dies within three 
weeks. Okra is likewise used to help detect the 
presence of root knot nematodes, and suscep­
tible tomato cultivars are grown to check for 
Fusarium wilt. When growing susceptible plants 
on purpose, remove them as soon as a disease 
diagnosis is made to keep the number of patho­
gens present in the site from increasing.
Manual Controls
Manual controls arc simple and inexpen­
sive pest-control strategies, since the only tools 
required are your time and patience. Besides 
controlling pests, manual controls require that 
you closely examine plants, increasing the like­
lihood that you'll detect the early symptoms 
of insect or disease problems.
Handpicking
When pest populations are low and lime 
is on your side, handpicking pests and their 
eggs from plants is simple and effective. Remov­
ing adult pests before they’ve had a chance to 
lay eggs prevents pest buildup and the result­
ing damage.
Protection Offered: The best candidates 
for handpicking are large, slow-moving pests, 
such as caterpillars, Colorado potato beetles, 
and slugs and snails, that aren't quick enough 
to escape. It's also easy to find and smash 
mealybugs, scales, and squash bugs. Scrape 
away easily identifiable egg masses, such as 
those of gypsy and tussock moths, from tree 
trunks or other surfaces, before the hungry
larvae emerge and begin feeding. Pests that 
fly away when disturbed, like leafhoppers. are 
belter controlled with other methods.
How to Use: Monitor plants several times 
each week. Be on the lookout for pests that fly 
or crawl into your garden and for pests that 
emerge from the soil. It’s important to learn 
to distinguish pests from beneficial organisms 
so you don’t accidentally destroy the “good 
guys”; see “Insect Impostors” on page 260. 
Remember to look for pest eggs and imma­
ture stages. Smash pest egg masses. Squeamish 
gardeners can wear plastic gloves (thin sur­
gical gloves are best) or carry long tweezers 
or tongs. If you’re after cutworms, slugs and 
snails, weevils, and other nighttime diners, 
wait until just after sunset and search plants 
with a flashlight.
Some bugs are difficult to handpick be­
cause they hide or fly away. Before handpicking, 
it may help to first spray the infested plants 
with water to get the pests moving. For exam­
ple, if you wet down squash plants before 
collecting squash bugs, they will either run to 
the topmost leaves or hide beneath those clos­
est to the ground. In either hiding place, they 
are easy to find and pick up. For flying insects, 
use a butterfly net to catch them before and 
after spraying the plants with water.
After you handpick, you have to follow 
through and make sure that the captured insects 
don't escape to feed anew. Here are some 
suggestions for disposal.
■ Carry a container of water mixed with 
soap or isopropyl alcohol (a 5 percent solu­
tion works well). Drop pests into the water; 
the soap helps to break the surface tension, 
causing pests to sink to the bottom.
■ Kill pests by leaving them overnight in 
a bag or jar in the freezer.
■ If you keep geese and chickens, they 
will quickly consume any insects tossed their 
way.

MANUAL CONTROLS ■ 
431
■ Compost captured pests in the center 
of a hot pile.
■ Flush them down the toilet.
■ Put them in your household trash—just 
make sure they cant escape.
■ Rub or scrape infestations of scale or 
mealybugs from plants, or swab them with 
cotton soaked in alcohol or liquid dish soap.
If you're uncertain as to the identity of a 
captured insect, keep it for identification. The 
staff at your local Cooperative Extension office 
or state land grant university can help you 
identify preserved captives.
You can preserve soft-bodied caterpillars 
by immersing them in boiling water for several 
seconds to kill them and to stop the enzymes 
that would cause them to break down (this is 
like blanching vegetables before freezing them). 
Large pests like tomato homworms will take 
longer to boil than small cutworms. Don’t let 
them boil too long or they will harden and 
lose their color. Place the boiled insects in 
vials or jars filled with rubbing alcohol. Use 
containers that seal tightly, since alcohol evap­
orates and loses its effectiveness as a preserva­
tive over time. For noncaterpillar pests, skip 
the boiling water bath.
Lawn Aeration Sandals
It’s time-consuming, but some research­
ers effectively manage root-damaging grubs 
(most are Japanese beetle larvae) in lawns by 
using special sandals.
Protection Offered: Lawn aeration san­
dals are equipped with 3" spikes that pene­
trate turf, piercing grubs that feed near the 
soil surface in spring and late summer.
How to Use: Put the sandals on and walk 
over the lawn several times, trying for about
2 penetrations per square inch of lawn—this 
is a lot of walking! You can purchase lawn 
aeration sandals from garden supply catalogs.
Mowing
Just as good pruning practices help main­
tain the health of trees, shrubs, and other 
garden plants, good mowing techniques encour­
age a healthy lawn.
Each time you mow. a freshly cut surface 
is available for pathogens to colonize. Repeated 
short mowing, under stressful conditions, makes 
plants smaller and fewer and allows weeds to 
easily move in. When plants are stressed by 
heat and drought in midsummer, it's best to 
raise the height of the blade and mow less 
frequently.
Protection Offered: Mowing to the proper 
height and mowing less frequently when plants 
are stressed will help prevent a broad range of 
pest problems.
How to Use: Proper mowing height is 
the top priority for controlling lawn pest prob­
lems without pesticides. To control lawn 
diseases, adjust the height of your mower as 
high as possible and mow infrequently. 
Prostrate, low-growing grasses do well at a 
height of 
fescues and ryegrasses should
be maintained at 1%'-3M.
Pruning
In some situations, handpicking pests isn't 
enough. You may have to prune away leaves 
or branches when pests, their eggs, and debris 
are heavily concentrated on 1 or several plant 
parts. Selective pruning also removes leaves 
infected with foliar diseases, such as powdery 
mildew, and keeps pathogens from spreading 
to other parts of the plant. Added disease 
control occurs when pruning exposes more 
of a plant’s foliage to air and light, reducing 
the conditions that encourage many fungal 
diseases.
Protection Offered: Control aphids, gar­
den webworms, leafminers, and tent caterpil­
lars by pruning infested plant parts. Pruning 
also limits the spread of foliar diseases and 
conditions that promote fungal growth.

432 
■ 
PHYSICAL CONTROLS
How to Use: There are many times when 
pruning for insect and disease control is 
effective. Try the following:
■ Prune egg masses attached to foliage 
as you monitor your plants.
■ Pick spinach leaves infected with 
leafminers and destroy them to avoid future 
generations.
■ To control garden w ebw orm s, prune 
away webbed leaves.
■ Pruning may also work well to remove 
aphid infestations from plants when they’re 
too numerous to handpick, and if they’re con­
centrated in a small area that you can remove 
without harming the plant.
■ When powdery or downy mildew first 
appears on foliage, prune to prevent further 
infection and to improve air circulation.
■ Remove tomato leaves infected with 
blight or leaf spots.
■ In fruit trees, prune infested wood to 
control flatheaded borers.
■ Prune tent caterpillars and their webs 
from plants and burn, crush, or hot compost 
them.
■ Fruit trees infected by fire blight bene­
fit from pruning that removes blighted twigs 
and disease cankers and stimulates air flow 
through the branches.
Pruning for Pest Control
F
or some insect and disease problems, 
a little careful pruning serves as a simple 
but effective control measure. The kind of 
pruning you'll do depends on the plant and 
the problem. For example, many kinds of 
perennials and woody plants form dense 
clumps of foliage that benefit from thinning. 
This involves cutting out some of the compet­
ing shoots, promoting better air circulation, 
and allowing more sunlight to reach the cen­
ter of the plant. Removing water sprouts and 
root suckers from woody plants also reduces 
the amount of succulent growth attractive to 
insects and pathogens.
On all plants, handpicking or cutting off 
diseased or infested parts is quite effective 
for pest control. You can easily prune cedar- 
apple rust galls off cedar trees, for instance, 
or bagworm cocoons off evergreen trees. If 
your tree has a disease that starts at the 
branch tips and spreads inward (such as 
fire blight or twig blight), you can minimize
the spread of disease by pruning off the af­
fected parts during dry weather. Cut off the 
infected area of the branch, along with at least 
6 " of healthy tissue. As in any pruning situa­
tion, prune back to a healthy bud or main limb; 
if you leave a stub of bare wood, it will die 
and become an entry point for other pests.
As you work with diseased plants, disin­
fect your tools between cuts by dipping them 
in a 10 percent bleach solution (1 part bleach 
to 9 parts water). Thoroughly clean up all 
trimmings as soon as you finish pruning, and 
place them in a hot (160°F) compost pile or 
in a sealed container for disposal. Be sure to 
wash your hands and disinfect tools before 
moving from diseased to healthy plants. And 
always use sharp tools, which will make clean, 
smooth cuts that are less prone to pest attack 
After any pruning, disinfect your tools, rinse 
them with water, and lightly oil all metal parts 
to prevent corrosion.

MANUAL CONTROLS 
■ 
433
Shaking
Shaking pests from plants is a method 
professionals use to monitor pest populations. 
In small gardens, shaking the pests from in­
fested foliage takes less time than handpicking. 
Shaking pests from hard-to-reach tree limbs 
may remove enough pests to reduce damage.
Protection Offered: Shaking will dislodge 
any pest that crawls freely about on plants 
without clinging, including Colorado potato 
beetles, cucumber beetles, earwigs, Japanese 
beetles, and weevils.
How to Use: Shaking pests from foliage 
works best early in the morning when insects 
are cool and sluggish. Capture night-feeding 
insects just before sunset when temperatures 
begin to drop. Spread a white sheet or drop- 
cloth under trees or plants, then shake or 
agitate the foliage with your hands or tap 
woody stems and limbs with a padded stick. 
Scoop up fallen pests and destroy them.
Professional scouts use beating trays to 
monitor pest populations. You can construct 
your own beating tray to catch and control 
pests. Sew 4 small triangular pieces of mate­
rial at the 4 corners of a piece of canvas or 
plastic roughly 3' square. Cut two 1 X  2’s to 
the diagonal length of the canvas and fasten 
them together in the middle with a bolt and 
wing nut (to form an X). Insert the ends of 
these crosspieces into the corner pockets 
formed by the triangular pieces of fabric to 
make a rigid tray. Place the beating tray di- 
recdy underneath foliage in the row, then shake 
the plants to knock pests onto the tray. The 
pests will be easy to spot against the white 
background.
Vacuuming
Commercial growers in California use 
tractor-mounted vacuums to remove bugs from 
strawberry plants, vacuuming twice each week 
when the insects are at their peak. In the 
home garden, careful use of a portable, re­
chargeable vacuum cleaner offers similar con­
trol advantages. Skim just the tops of infested 
plants and you’ll avoid sucking up fragile ben­
eficial wasps, which tend to remain on lower 
foliage. Beneficial predatory mites cling tightly 
to leaves and also remain unharmed.
Protection Offered: Vacuuming removes 
large leaf-eating pests like Japanese beetles 
and Colorado potato beetles as well as faster 
cucumber beetles and whiteflies. You can also 
vacuum up earwigs, sowbugs, and other pests.
How to Use: Lightly move your porta­
ble vacuum over the tops of vegetable and 
ornamental plants, taking care to avoid dam­
aging tender leaves and shoots. Remove pests 
from the bag and dispose of them (see page 
430 for disposal options). Don’t give them a 
chance to escape!
Water Sprays
The physical action of a spray of water 
knocks plant-eating pests off plants and dam­
ages them sufficiently so that they are unlikely 
to resume feeding. Commercial grape growers 
control spider mites with overhead irrigation 
applied in late June and July when mites thrive 
in the heat.
Protection Offered: Controls small, soft- 
bodied insects like aphids, leafhoppers. spider 
mites, and thrips.
How to Use: To spray pests away with 
water, adjust the nozzle on your hose to pro­
vide a forceful spray that covers a large area. 
Hard and steady streams directed at 1 spot can 
damage foliage and flowers; move the spray 
back and forth among plants, being sure to 
reach under leaves.
To avoid encouraging diseases while con­
trolling insects, refrain from spraying water 
during humid, wet weather. Excessive spraying 
of young, tender seedlings promotes damping- 
off disease; use other controls on seed beds. 
In hot, sunny weather, spray early in the morn­

434 
■ 
PHYSICAL CONTROLS
ing or at dusk to avoid leaving droplets on the 
leaves, which could cause foliage to burn.
Baits, Traps, and Lures
Use the pest-control strategies in this sec­
tion to lure pests into situations from which 
they can*t escape. Pest baits and lures can be 
visual (using color or light to attract the pest), 
sexual (using pest-specific pheromones), or 
dietary (using preferred insect foods or 
kairomes, which are feeding stimulants).
When using sticky traps, cover them with 
a commercial sticky coating, such as Tangle- 
Trap, Stickem. Stiky Stuff, Tanglefoot, or Bug 
Gum, or make your own. Mix equal parts of 
petroleum jelly or mineral oil and liquid dish 
soap to make an inexpensive sticky coating 
that is easy to remove.
To capture small, lightweight pests like 
aphids, thrips, and whiteflies, dilute the heav­
ier ointments to make application easier (use
1 part sticky coating to 2 parts paint thinner). 
Or, buy easy-to-apply, brush-on formulas. For 
heavier pests, such as caterpillars, that may 
resist being stuck, use sticky coatings at full 
strength.
Apple Maggot Traps
Apple maggot traps are red, apple-size 
spheres covered with sticky coating. The traps 
attract the attention of adult flies when they 
are ready to lay eggs. Zooming in for a landing 
on what they think is an apple, they become 
entrapped in the adhesive. You can trap enough 
flies on red sphere traps to control the damage 
they cause to fruit.
Protection Offered: Use sticky red spheres 
in your apple orchard to monitor the arrival 
and departure of apple maggot flies; this knowl­
edge is useful if you choose to spray your trees 
to control apple maggots. You can also con­
trol these pests by concentrating several traps 
in small areas.
How to Use: You can buy inexpensive.
reusable red spheres, designed to attract apple 
maggot flies, from garden suppliers. They come 
with attached hangers for easy placement in 
apple trees. Or, make your own traps by paint­
ing any apple-size red ball with sticky coating. 
Use old red croquet, rubber, or plastic balls. 
Install an eye screw and insert a support wire 
or string for hanging. You can also buy apple- 
scented lures to attach to your traps, but their 
effectiveness is controversial. The lures attract 
more apple maggot flies, but also appeal to 
flies of other closely related species. The con­
centration of flies may gum up the trap with­
out improving apple maggot control. Some 
orchardists recommend the addition of a yel­
low sticky trap behind the red sphere. The red 
ball attracts adult flies ready to lay eggs, while 
the yellow trap lures newly emerged flies, which 
feed on apple foliage.
Hang traps in mid-June and leave them in 
place until after harvest. In small orchards of 
10-15 trees, hang 1 trap for every dwarf tree,
2 or 3 traps for every semi-dwarf, and up to 6 
for each full-size tree. In large orchards place 
1 trap every 100' among the perimeter trees 
in an orchard block. Also use 1 or 2 traps per 
acre within the block, and put a trap in every 
wild or abandoned apple and crab apple tree 
within 400 yards of the orchard. Renew the 
sticky surface of the balls every 2 weeks by 
scraping off the accumulated insects and apply­
ing new coating. In dusty locations, renew 
traps more frequently.
Commercial Products: BioLure trap with 
attractant dispenser card attached (also at­
tracts blueberry maggots and walnut husk flies), 
Ladd apple maggot traps with synthetic apple 
odor bait
Bait Traps
In small gardens, you can lure pests away 
from susceptible crops by placing attractive 
vegetable baits near your crops. By regularly 
checking the bait, you can capture and destroy 
pests before they move on to your crops.

BAITS. TRAPS. AND LURES 
■ 
435
Protection Offered: Carrot and potato 
baits trap wireworms that live in garden soil 
and damage plant root systems. Wireworms 
are a common pest in areas that were covered 
by sod (such as a lawn, alfalfa, cover crops, or 
even weeds) the previous year. Use damaged 
squash to attract cucumber beetles, which 
damage foliage and transmit disease. Plant 
cull onions to distract onion maggot flies.
How to Use: Use carrots or potatoes to 
trap wireworms in garden soil. Insert several 
mature carrots every 2 ^-3 ' into the soil through­
out the garden where sod was grown the previ­
ous year. Or, skewer raw potato chunks with 
bamboo stakes and bury them several inches 
deep every few feet, leaving the stakes pro­
truding as a marker and handle. Several times 
each week throughout the season, pull these 
traps from the soil and remove the wireworms. 
Replace the same trap until a fresh vegetable 
is needed.
To attract adult cucumber beetles, cut 
chunks of fresh squash and place in recycled 
pint-size cartons sunk into the soil. Place 1 trap 
per hill of squash or related crops. Check the 
traps once a day during peak populations to 
collect and kill the pests; replace the bait when 
it loses effectiveness.
To control onion maggots in onions, plant 
cull onions (onions that have sprouted in stor­
age) about 2" deep between the rows where 
you’ve sown seeds for your main crop. The 
bulbs will grow much faster than the seedlings 
and attract the egg-laying flies. Two weeks 
after the bulbs sprout, pull them out and destroy 
them to prevent the next generation of onion 
maggots from developing. This trap works best 
when used along with repellents such as pow­
dered ginger or hot pepper sprinkled on the 
seed rows to repel flies.
Cherry Fruit Fly Traps
Traps for cherry fruit flies differ from 
other yellow sticky traps in their shape and 
the addition of an ammonia lure.
Protection Offered: Use hom em ade 
sticky traps to catch and control adult cherry 
fruit flies in cherry orchards. You can also use 
them as monitoring tools to help you decide if 
and when to apply botanical insecticides.
How to Use: Paint a 10" X  6" piece of 
plywood bright yellow (use Federal Safety Yel­
low No. 659 from Rustoleum Company or 
Saturn Yellow from Day-Glo Colors), then 
cover it with sticky coating. Below it, hang a 
small, screen-covered jar filled with a mixture 
of equal parts ammonia and water, or a com­
mercial apple maggot lure. Instead of a flat 
piece of plywood, you can paint the bell-shaped 
top half of a plastic, 2-liter soda bottle. In one 
study, this bottle trap was found superior to 
commercial designs for controlling Western 
cherry fruit flies.
For a small orchard, use at least 4 traps. 
Hang them 6-8' high among the leaves, pref­
erably on the south side of the trees. Renew 
the bait weekly and check that the glue is still 
sticky. When it loses its stickiness, scrape off 
the accumulated insects and apply more glue.
Chinch Bug Traps
Chinch bugs are tiny lawn pests that destroy 
stems and leaves of lawn grasses. To monitor 
or control them in your lawn, drive them out 
of the sod with soapy water and into a drop- 
cloth for counting and disposal.
Protection Offered: This type of protec­
tion works best for small areas. If you have a 
large lawn that is infested with chinch bugs, 
treatment with neem may provide more effec­
tive control.
How to Use: Mix 1 ounce of liquid dish 
soap in 2 gallons of water. Pour the mixture 
over 1 square yard of lawn. For large areas, 
you can use a garden hose with a siphon mixer 
attachment. Lay a large piece of white cloth, 
preferably flannel, over the treated area for 
15-20 minutes, then pick it up. The bugs are 
driven out of the sod by the soapy soaking and 
then catch their feet on the flannel in their

436 
■ 
PHYSICAL CONTROLS
attempt to escape. Count them if you're moni­
toring the pest population, then kill them by 
rinsing them off the flannel into a bucket of 
soapy water. If there are fewer than 10-15 
bugs per square foot, it is unlikely that they'll 
cause serious damage to your lawn. Water 
well to rinse the soap from the grass after you 
remove the flannel.
Earwig Traps
The same traps used to capture slugs and 
snails work equally well for trapping earwigs, 
but a different bait is used.
Protection Offered: If your garden has 
heavy infestations of earwigs, this simple trap 
may help control the population. Before you 
try to trap earwigs, remember that they are 
predators of aphids and other small garden 
pests; they do sometimes damage young plants, 
but more often are blamed for injuries caused 
by other night-feeding pests. Although they are 
scary-looking, earwigs pose no threat to people.
How to Use: A low container, such as a 
tuna can or pie plate, set into the soil so the 
rim is even with the soil surface and baited 
with fish oil or oil-soaked bread crumbs will 
attract large numbers of earwigs.
Japanese Beetle Traps
Japanese beetle traps rely on a combina­
tion of floral and fruit scents to attract females 
and a sex pheromone to trap the males. Most 
traps consist of some type of baffle with a bait 
container attached, hanging above a funnel 
that leads to a collection container. The bee­
tles fly into the baffle and slide down the 
funnel into the container. The container can 
be removed so you can dispose of the beetles.
Protection Offered: You can protect small 
areas from adult Japanese beetles by surround­
ing them with traps baited with floral lures 
and sexual pheromones. They attract lots of
beetles—the problem is that they may attract 
more than would normally arrive. Japanese 
beetle controls work best when used by entire 
communities, since the adults easily migrate 
from one yard to the next. Unfortunately, traps 
that capture adult beetles don’t appear to re­
sult in a corresponding drop in the number 
of grubs found in lawns. Adults that fail to 
land in a trap often wind up on the lawn, 
where they mate and lay eggs; the lawn area 
surrounding a beetle trap may have a much 
higher population of grubs. To control grubs, 
use a combination of biological and physi­
cal methods. See "Lawn Aeration Sandals” 
on page 431 and "Milky Disease Spores" on 
page 460.
How to Use: You can buy commercial 
traps with either disposable plastic bags or 
permanent collection reservoirs. Make your 
own traps by cutting a wide opening in the top 
of a 1-gallon plastic jug (leave the handle in 
place for carrying). Fill it one-third full with 
wine or sugar and water, pieces of mashed 
fruit, and some yeast to enhance fermentation. 
An appealing bait for Japanese beetles is made 
by mixing 1 pint water. 1 banana or any non­
citrus fruit, V2 cup sugar or honey, V2 cup wine, 
and % teaspoon baking yeast. Let the mixture 
sit in a warm place until it starts to ferment 
before placing it in the traps.
In the spring, set traps 1-3' above the 
ground in open, sunny areas. Place them 20-30' 
downwind from the beetle's favorite plants 
(these may include most of the plants in your 
garden). To trap beetles over large areas, place 
a trap every 200' surrounding the garden or 
yard. Or, use 3 traps for each Vs acre of gar­
den space.
The traps should be emptied of beetles 
daily since dead beetles repel the live ones 
flying in.
Commercial Products: Bag-a-Bug, Bio- 
Lure traps. Safer traps

BAITS. TRAPS. AND LURES ■ 
437
Light Traps
With the exception of the apple maggot 
fly, insects cannot see the color red. Their 
vision is limited to the ultraviolet (UV) to 
orange-red range, which is why they are 
attracted to blacklights (ultraviolet). Entomol­
ogists often use light traps to monitor popula­
tions of moths, which helps the scientists predict 
crop damage and advise growers when to apply 
control measures. Such traps direct pests to a 
holding reservoir from which captives are col­
lected and identified.
Protection Offered: Don't use UV light 
“bug zappers" in the home garden, since they 
attract and kill just as many beneficial insects 
as pests. They do provide good fly control 
inside bams and poultry houses and are a 
useful defense in orchards against codling moths 
when used for limited periods of time. Black- 
light traps also help control the adult moths of 
corn earworms, European com  borers, and 
fall armyworms.
How to Use: Place 1 UV light trap near 
your fruit trees or com  planting. Use an auto­
matic timer to activate the light from 11:00 RM. 
to 3:00 A.M. Moth control is most effective 
during this time, while injury to beneficial 
insects is minimized.
Pheromone Traps
Insects produce chemicals called sex pher­
omones to help them locate suitable mates. 
Some male insects are able to detect female 
pheromones at extremely low concentrations 
from as far away as 5 miles. Professional pest 
scouts take advantage of this ability by using 
synthetic pheromones, placed in special traps, 
to attract and capture the males of a species. 
By monitoring daily capture rates to detect 
population fluctuations, they can advise grow­
ers if and when control measures are necessary.
Some growers use pheromone traps to 
capture male codling moths and other pests
to prevent them from fathering future genera­
tions and to control their damage. This type 
of pest control using pheromones is called 
mass trapping.
Protection Offered: Pheromones for pro­
fessional pest monitoring are available for more 
than 40 insect species. Gardeners have a more 
limited selection available from garden sup­
pliers, and only certain pests are actually con­
trolled with the traps. Mass trapping is most 
successful against moth species that mate only 
once, such as codling moths. You can pur­
chase pheromones to monitor such specific 
pests as cabbage loopers, cherry fruit flies, 
com earworms. leafrollers. oriental fruit moths, 
and peachtree borers.
How to Use: Purchase traps from gar­
den suppliers or make your own from 1-quart 
ice-cream containers. Cut 3 large holes in the 
sides of the container for insects to enter. Fill 
the bottom half with soapy water. Suspend the 
pheromone capsule from the lid using string 
or wire, then snap the trap closed. Attach 
the trap to a garden stake for low-growing 
crops like tom atoes, or hang them from 
branches in fruit trees.
Commercial traps are inexpensive and 
easy to use and come in several shapes and 
sizes. Their bottoms are coated with sticky 
adhesive that holds the insects tight. Perma­
nent, plastic traps will last for several growing 
seasons. Disposable cardboard traps will last 
the season if cleaned periodically.
In early spring before pests emerge, or by 
the time buds begin to open, hang traps in 
fruit trees about 6' from the ground and away 
from the trunk. To control codling moth and 
other fruit pests, place 2 pheromone traps 
in each large tree; use 1 trap for each dwarf 
tree. The objective is to trap all of the males 
before they mate, capturing them in the sticky 
ointment that coats the trap bottoms. Situate 
traps for different species at least 10' apart in

438 
■ 
PHYSICAL CONTROLS
the garden. In trees, hang traps for different 
species as far from each other as possible in 
the tree.
During the period when the pests are 
most active, check the traps twice each week. 
Remove insects and other debris. When traps 
are full, replace disposable ones, and follow 
the suppliers recommendations for renewing 
pheromone lures in reusable types. Replace 
pheromone capsules according to package 
instructions.
Mass trapping works best if your orchard 
is isolated from other sources of codling moth 
and other fruit pests (at least 1 mile away from 
other apple, pear, or walnut trees), since new 
pests migrate from neighboring orchards.
If you're just using traps to monitor a 
pest. 2 or 3 traps are sufficient for a 3-5 acre 
garden or orchard. Follow the guidelines above 
and the suppliers' instructions.
Pheromone lures are available from gar­
den suppliers and pest management firms. 
You can purchase them separately or in a 
package with the coated trap and hanger. Keep 
lures in a cool, dry place until they're needed. 
BioLures can be stored for a few months, 
unopened, in the freezer.
Commercial Products: BioLure traps, 
Pherocon lures. Phero Tech traps, Scentry 
traps
Slug and Snail Traps
Slugs and snails are difficult to control 
since they feed at night and hide during the 
day. You can identify slug and snail damage by 
looking for shiny trails of slime that surround 
the chewed holes in leaves. Beware of com­
mercially available baits that are not organic; 
some are highly toxic. Cover traps to keep 
pets and wildlife from lapping up their contents.
Protection Offered: Use these traps to 
capture slugs and snails and, occasionally, other 
crawling creatures, such as sowbugs.
How to Use: Garden supply stores and
catalogs offer traps that feature a reservoir for 
bait or a liquid in which the pests drown. 
Follow trap instructions and bury them par­
tially in the soil to create a cool, damp envi­
ronment that will attract these pests. You can 
bait the traps with beer; a mixture of yeast, 
molasses, and water; or a commercial attrac­
tant. Use 1 trap for every 10 square feet of 
garden space. Under heavy infestation, check 
the traps daily to remove pests and replace bait.
You can make traps from aluminum pie 
plates or other recycled containers: just sink 
them to the brim in the soil and fill with beer. 
Or, cut a 1" hole in the side of an empty coffee 
can about halfway up. Bury the can so the 
hole is even with the soil surface and pests can 
enter, then fill the trap half-full with beer. The 
lid will keep rain away and allow you access to 
the pests trapped inside.
Slugs and snails seek out moist, shady 
spots in which to spend the daylight hours. 
Place overturned pots, boards, shingles, or 
even the rind from your morning grapefruit on 
soil near plants, then collect and destroy the 
pests early in the morning before the sun drives 
them elsewhere.
Commercial Products: Garden Sentry, 
Slug Saloon
Sticky Boards
Traps covered with sticky coating strate­
gically placed among your plants will capture 
sufficient numbers of certain pests to control 
their damage. Originally used to monitor pest 
population fluctuations, sticky boards work 
well as controls when concentrated in small 
areas.
Protection Offered: Use bright yellow 
traps to control aphids, cabbage root flies, 
carrot rust flies, cucumber beetles, fungus 
gnats, imported cabbageworms. onion flies, 
thrips, and whiteflies in the garden and 
greenhouse. Some growers report that blue 
traps are best for monitoring thrips, but not

BAITS. TRAPS. ANI) LURES ■ 439
for controlling them. Use white traps to moni­
tor European apple sawflies, flea beetles, and 
tarnished plant bugs.
How to Use: Sticky traps are simple affairs 
to mass produce at home. To make traps that 
will last several years, cut boards from ‘A" 
plywood, masonite, or a similar material and 
fasten them with staples or nails to garden 
stakes. You can also design them to hang from 
wire supports. Either way, make sure the traps 
are at average plant height. Traps made from 
cardboard or paper plates will work well in a 
greenhouse, where they are protected from 
the elements.
Trap size is limited only by the materials 
on hand, since scientists haven't yet decided 
exactly what is “too big" or “too small.” 
Naturally, larger traps will catch more pests. 
Commercial traps are available in a range of 
sizes from 3" x  5" and up. Long, narrow, 
rectangular, or oval shapes may attract the 
most pests.
Apply sticky coating directly to your 
painted boards, or for easier clean-up, staple 
waxed paper or plastic wrap over them. In 
either case, leave 1 corner uncoated for easier 
handling.
Try these trapping tips for common pests.
■ To catch whiteflies and other pests, 
paint boards yellow (Federal Safety Yellow 
No. 659 from Rustoleum Company and Saturn 
Yellow from Day-Glo Colors are 2 colors most 
pests find attractive) before applying home­
made or commercial sticky coating.
■ Staple a cotton ball soaked in oil of 
allspice, bay, or clove to your sticky traps to 
capture cucumber beetles in cucumber and 
squash plantings.
■ Paint your traps a bright blue, such as 
cobalt or royal blue, to monitor thrips.
■ Use bright white traps to monitor flea 
beetles or tarnished plant bugs.
Use 1 trap for several plants. Wait sev­
eral days, then add more traps if pests con­
tinue to cause damage. For whitefly control, 
don't spread the traps too thin in the garden, 
since these pests don't travel far from the host.
Place your traps near plants, but not so 
close that foliage gets stuck to the boards. 
You can form a guard of hardware cloth or 
chicken wire around each trap to keep it from 
touching you and your plants. Set traps with 
the sticky sides facing your plants, but out of 
direct sunlight. Try to avoid placing traps where 
the wind will blow dust and debris onto them. 
Occasionally disturb infested foliage with your 
hands to drive feeding pests into flight.
You can clean pest-covered traps with a 
paint scraper, or wipe insects away with a 
cloth soaked in baby oil or vegetable oil, before 
applying fresh sticky coating.
To monitor tarnished plant bugs in apple 
and peach trees, hang 4 traps per full-size tree, 
or 1 per dwarf tree. To capture flea beetles, 
place traps just above eggplant, tomato, or 
pepper foliage.
Commercial Products: BioLure traps. 
Chroma-line Card traps, Olson Stiky Strips, 
Trapstix
Trap Crops
Grow pests' favorite plants to lure them 
away from your garden crops. Plant these trap 
crops around your garden or between the rows. 
When a trap crop becomes infested, pull it 
and destroy the pests. For pests that disperse 
quickly when disturbed, cover the trap plants 
with a sheet or bag before you pull them. This 
control method works best for pests that pro­
duce only a few generations each summer or 
for crops that need protection for a short, 
critical period in the season. A drawback is 
that you have to sacrifice harvest from the 
trap crop and garden space to grow it.
Protection Offered: You can use trap 
crops to catch a variety of insect pests. Un­

440 ■ 
PHYSICAL CONTROLS
fortunately, trap crops may end up attracting 
more pests than usual to your garden. And if 
they’re not pulled at the right time, the trap 
crops can provide more food for future gener­
ations of pests. Also, destroying the trap crop 
may mean sacrificing the beneficial insects 
that were attracted by the pests.
How to Use: To lure flying pests from 
your favorite crops, plant an attractive alter­
native nearby. When pests are concentrated 
on the trap crop, capture and destroy them, or 
pull and destroy the plant. Try the following 
trap crops.
■ Plant various species of flowering mus­
tard to trap cabbageworms and harlequin bugs.
■ Nasturtiums will attract flea beetles 
away from cabbage seedlings until the plants 
are large enough to withstand attack, but you 
will have to plant nasturtiums earlier than 
usual. Try starting the trap crop indoors in 
peat pots, along with the vegetable seedlings. 
Nasturtiums are also favorites of aphids, but, 
if not removed, will serve as a breeding ground 
from which these pests can infest the rest of 
your garden.
■ You may want to sacrifice an early 
crop of radishes in order to control flea beetle 
and root maggot damage on broccoli, cabbage, 
and related vegetables.
■ Tomato hornworms are attracted to 
dill and lovage; the trap crops lure the pest 
away from tomato plants.
■ If you want to protect soybeans from 
Mexican bean beetles, plant green beans 
between the rows of soybeans as a trap crop.
■ Chervil is irresistible to slugs; plant it 
among vegetables and ornamentals in slug 
territory.
■ In the greenhouse, use pots of sprouted 
wheat to lure fungus gnats from your plants, 
then hot compost the soil and wheat when the 
females have laid their eggs in it. Start a new 
crop of wheat every 2 weeks.
Water Traps
Bright yellow pans or basins full of water 
with a few drops of liquid soap added are 
attractive to winged aphids and cabbage root 
flies. Adding soap breaks the surface tension 
of the water, so insects sink to the bottom. 
The yellow color attracts the pests, who try to 
alight and are drowned.
Protection Offered: Water traps are use­
ful for monitoring winged aphids and cabbage 
root flies in the home garden.
How to Use: Paint the inside of a heavy 
plastic basin or metal pan bright yellow (Fed­
eral Safety Yellow No. 659 from Rustoleum 
Company and Saturn Yellow from Day-Glo 
Colors are 2 colors most pests find attrac­
tive). Add 
or more of water and a few 
drops of liquid dish soap to the pan.
Set out the traps anywhere in the garden. 
Be sure the trap is exposed enough that insects 
will see it and be able to fly into it. Put the trap 
on a box or stand if plants are growing densely. 
Monitor this type of trap carefully to make 
sure you are not catching beneficial parasitic 
wasps in the water. If you find parasitic wasps, 
stop using the traps. The wasps are probably 
providing sufficient aphid control.
Barriers
Since barriers are meant to keep pests 
away from your plants, they should be put in 
place before the pests arrive. Among the choices 
below are several that you can leave in place 
all season. You may have to remove the covers 
when the plants outgrow them, when pollina­
tion by insects is necessary, or when tempera­
tures under the barriers become too high. 
When using barriers, fasten down the edges at 
the soil line to prevent pests from moving in.
Ant Barriers
Ants tend to gather where aphids are 
concentrated, since they feed on the aphid 
secretions. Tending them like livestock, the

BARRIERS ■ 
441
ants will actually carry the aphids to a food 
source, then tend them and protect them from 
predators.
Protection Offered: Ant barriers on the 
legs of greenhouse tables prevent ants from 
reaching your seedlings.
How to Use: Cut a hole that corresponds 
in size and shape to a cross-section of each 
table leg through the center of an aluminum 
pie plate. Invert the cut pans and slide 1 up 
each table leg. Fold each pan downward to 
form a cup and cover the inside of the cupped 
plate with a sticky coating. Seal the crack 
between the pie plate and the table leg with 
caulking or sticky coating. Renew the sticky 
coating when necessary. Leave the traps in 
place permanently to guard against ants.
Antitranspirants
Antitranspirants are commercial products 
usually sprayed on trees and shrubs in fall to 
help protect them from winter damage.
Protection Offered: Reports indicate that 
antitranspirants form a barrier on leaves to 
prevent disease organisms such as powdery 
mildew spores from germinating and infect­
ing plants. However, these products are not 
approved and registered for use as fungicides.
How to Use: Follow label instructions 
for coating plants. Avoid spraying drought- 
stressed plants on hot, sunny days.
Commercial Products: Folicote, For- 
EverGreen, Vapor Gard, Wilt-Pruf
Bagging Fruit
In small orchards, you can take the time 
to protect individual fruit on apple and pear 
trees by enclosing them in paper bags. The 
bags prevent insect pests from finding and 
damaging the fruit.
Protection Offered: Bagging works well 
to control codling moth damage on apples 
and pears.
How to Use: After thinning, place paper 
bags over individual fruit. Avoid using plastic
bags, which will overheat the fruit. Tie them 
securely to the limbs with string or twist ties. 
Remove the bags just before harvesting.
Copper Strips
Copper repels slugs and snails. Some sci­
entific studies indicate that copper is effective 
because slugs and snails actually get an elec­
tric shock when they touch it. Their slimy 
coating may interact chemically with the cop­
per, creating an electric current.
Protection Offered: Using copper strips 
as a permanent edging for borders or beds is 
an effective but expensive way to keep slugs 
and snails away from flowers and vegetables.
How to Use: There are several ways to 
use copper repellent products to prevent slug 
and snail damage.
■ Buy copper-backed paper from gar­
den suppliers and staple it to 3" wide boards 
placed around the garden in a continuous 
border.
■ Bury a 3"-4" wide copper strip around 
the edge of the bed or border, leaving 2"-3”of 
the copper exposed. Bend the top V2 " of the 
strip outward at a right angle to form a lip (like 
an upside-down L). Once the barrier is in 
place, you may have to trap and remove the 
slugs and snails that were already inside the 
barricaded bed.
■ In the greenhouse, tack strips of cop­
per 2'h." wide around bench legs.
■ Place strips of copper sheeting around 
tree trunks to keep the slimy pests away. Cut a 
T -3” wide strip of copper several inches longer 
than the tree circumference, so you can en­
large the band as the plant grows. Punch holes 
in the ends, then fasten the strip securely 
around the trunk by feeding a piece of wire 
through the holes and twisting it tight. Remove 
suckers, water sprouts, and nearby weeds that 
might provide alternate routes for the snails 
and slugs.
Commercial Products: Snail-Barr

442 
■ 
PHYSICAL CONTROLS
Crawling Pest Barriers
Bands of unattractive or abrasive materi­
als that circle garden plants or beds can be 
used for mild infestations to keep pests away. 
Dusts or powders such as diatomaceous earth, 
wood ashes, or crushed seashells scratch the 
insects waxy coating, destroying their water 
balance and killing them. Slugs and snails 
may also be deterred by these materials, which 
can irritate the soft bodies of these creatures. 
Insects and other crawling pests generally avoid 
such barriers. When pest populations arc high 
or when wet weather renders the barrier 
ineffective, you may have to supplement with 
other control measures.
For control methods for ants, see “Ant 
Barriers” on page 440; for slugs and snails, see 
“Copper Strips” on page 441.
Protection Offered: Barriers keep earwigs, 
slugs and snails, sowbugs, and soft-bodied crawl­
ing pests like caterpillars away from your plants. 
On tree trunks, dehydrating dusts repel ants 
and may help deter adult forms of borers from 
laying eggs on the bark.
How to Use: Place a 2" wide strip of 
wood ashes, diatomaceous earth, sawdust, 
crushed seashells, cinders, or similar organic 
materials as a border around beds or individ­
ual plants. Or, spread a circle of the same 
materials around individual plants, covering 
the area out to the dripline or at least within a 
6" radius of the stem. Some materials will 
have to be replaced after rain. Borders like 
diatomaceous earth and ashes are most effec­
tive when kept dry.
Make a dehydrating dust paint by mixing 
‘A pound diatomaceous earth with 1 teaspoon 
of pure liquid soap, like Ivory, and enough 
water to make a thick slurry. Apply this paint 
to the lower trunk of a tree to give double 
protection; it shields the bark from the sun 
and discourages pests.
Place a “fence” of aluminum foil around 
beds and gardens if you are trying to control 
caterpillars such as armyworms and cutworms.
Bury one edge of the foil in the soil, leaving 
several inches extending beyond the soil surface. 
Fold the top edge away from the garden to 
form a lip (like an upside-down L) that cater­
pillars will find difficult to cross.
Cutworm Collars
Cutworm collars protect seedlings from 
caterpillar damage. Cutworms are night-feeders 
that spend the day just under the soil surface, 
resting near your plants.
Protection Offered: Barriers placed 
around susceptible seedlings such as cab­
bage, eggplant, and beans provide protection 
from cutworms and other pests that crawl up 
the stem.
How to Use: Recycle cardboard tubes 
from toilet paper and paper towels. Cut the 
tubes into 2"-3" sections, then place them 
over small seedlings while transplanting, push­
ing the collars into the soil. Thin, soft card­
board holds up in the garden long enough to 
protect your plants until they are beyond the 
susceptible stage. Shallow cans with the bot­
toms cut out also make satisfactory cutworm 
collars, although they won’t deteriorate like 
cardboard collars and will have to be removed.
Floating Row Covers
When placed over young plants, these 
row covers don’t float, they rest lightly on the 
foliage, looking like flattened sheets of cotton 
candy. They make great pest barriers, and you 
can irrigate as usual since they’re water- and 
light-permeable. You can use floating row cover 
to extend the growing season, since tempera­
tures undercover tend to be a few degrees 
higher than outside in the spring and fall. In 
the Northeast, spring harvests are often 5-10 
days earlier. During hot summers, however, 
heat-sensitive plants like lettuce and cole crops 
can suffer, since temperatures under the row 
cover may increase by as much as 30°Fduring 
the day. Floating row cover doesn’t provide

BARRIERS ■ 443
adequate frost protection during cold spells, 
and you'll have to remove it to control weeds.
Several types of floating row cover are 
offered in garden supply stores and catalogs.
■ Polyethylene is actually plastic; it's the 
heaviest and warmest material and offers the 
most cold protection.
■ Polyester, polypropylene, and polyvi­
nyl alcohol are “spunbonded" (fine threads 
tangled and bonded together), lightweight, 
porous materials that make the best pest 
barriers.
■ Polystyrene is heavier than the spun- 
bonded covers and is popular with nursery 
owners for protecting perennial plants from 
the extremes of winter.
Commercial brands vary in longevity and 
the degree of warmth provided, but these dif­
ferences are usually negligible. You can make 
your own alternatives to commercial floating 
row cover with mosquito netting, cheesecloth, 
or sheer drapery fabric. Remember that larger 
pores mean a greater chance that pests will 
penetrate your barrier, and fabric with finer 
pores may not offer adequate air circulation.
Protection Offered: Floating row cover 
controls insects and other pests that fly or 
crawl toward plants. They also control the 
plant diseases that insects transmit and stop 
rabbits, birds, groundhogs, and other animal 
pests. Row covers won't control the pests that 
emerge from soil once the covers are in place; 
crop rotation is still necessary.
Plan to use floating row cover barriers if 
you have problems with aphids, asparagus 
beetles, cabbage root maggots, caterpillars 
like cutworms and armyworms, Colorado po­
tato beetles, flea beetles, leafhoppers, and 
Mexican bean beetles. Leave row cover over 
carrots all summer to control carrot rust flies. 
On ornamental plants place floating row cover 
over seedlings to protect them from foliage 
damage early in the season; remove it once
the plants begin to flower and are large enough 
to withstand damage.
How to Use: Before covering, thoroughly 
weed the site. Place covers over the row imme­
diately after planting seeds or transplants, since 
some insects are able to locate seeds before 
the plants emerge. If pests have already arrived, 
you'll have to eliminate them before covering. 
These lightweight covers are most easily in­
stalled on quiet, still days, since the slightest 
breeze sends them flapping away.
Lay them over the row or bed, leaving 
enough slack to allow plants to grow under­
neath. Anchor the edges with soil, rocks, boards, 
bricks, or other heavy objects. You can make 
or buy hoop supports for delicate crops like 
baby lettuce that may be damaged by abrasion. 
Later, remove the covers temporarily to thin 
plants, weed, or harvest. In the spring, period­
ically check for aphid infestations.
Remove covers permanently when plants 
are flowering, when plants are large enough to 
withstand some damage, or when the pests 
are no longer a threat. After using, wash them 
with soapy water (add bleach if you have dis­
ease problems) and rinse well before drying 
and storing. Patch holes and tears with duct 
tape placed on both sides. For extra cold 
protection, use 2 covers together; light pen­
etration will be reduced to about 65 percent. 
Floating row cover is available in 5-50'widths. 
Used for spring and fall season extension in 
the northern states, it should last several sea­
sons. When used all season long in hot, sunny 
climates, it deteriorates more quickly.
Commercial Products: Agryl row covers, 
Kimberly Farms Floating Row Covers, Reemay
Mulches
Mulches provide a barrier between plant 
foliage and soil that may contain disease spores 
or pests. They also serve as a barrier for pests 
that are headed for the floor of your garden, 
either to lay eggs or to rest for the winter.

444 
■ 
PHYSICAL CONTROLS
Besides being useful for pest control, mulches 
of various materials serve many other cultural 
purposes such as retaining soil moisture, add­
ing organic matter to the soil, warming the 
soil for heat-loving plants, and controlling 
weeds. The list of possible mulch materials 
seems endless. However, certain materials have 
distinct advantages when used for controlling 
insect and disease pests. An organic mulch, 
replaced several times each year, will help 
prevent disease spores from building up and 
prevent splashing rain drops that carry spores.
Protection Offered: Control aphids, leaf­
hoppers, and thrips on cabbages and peppers 
in the garden and greenhouse with a mulch of 
aluminum foil. You will also control the plant 
diseases that these pests carry. Use a black 
plastic mulch to discourage sowbugs and other 
crawling pests that cant stand the heat; black 
plastic also keeps leafminers from emerging 
from infested soil and prevents their return to 
the soil to pupate. By blocking sunlight from 
the soil, black plastic mulch provides weed 
control as well. A thick layer of organic mulch 
will prevent shallow-rooted plants from being 
heaved out of the soil by frost action during 
the winter, because it moderates changes in 
soil temperature.
H ow  to U se: You can buy aluminum- 
coated paper to cover beds or rows before 
planting. Anchor the edges with soil or weights, 
then cut 3"-4" diameter holes for transplants 
or seeds. Later in the summer, remove the 
mulch to prevent reflected heat damage to 
large plants. You can also use wide, heavy-duty 
aluminum foil. On wide beds, run 2 strips of 
foil the length of the bed, leaving a gap several 
inches wide between the strips; plant in the 
gap. Scientists are experimenting with black 
plastic mulch sprayed with aluminum-colored 
paint as a substitute for foil.
To control rose diseases, rake debris and 
old mulch away from the stems in the fall. 
Apply fresh compost or other organic mulch.
In mid-winter prune as usual and apply more 
mulch to protect the plants from spring heaving. 
In the spring gradually remove the mulch as 
temperatures increase, then apply a fresh sum­
mer mulch.
Covering garden and greenhouse soil with 
materials like newspaper or brown paper pre­
vents thrips from reaching the soil in order to 
pupate. Weight paper mulches down with soil, 
boards, or other items so they can't blow away. 
These materials break down quickly; replace 
them periodically.
Painting
Protect fruit trees from both flatheaded 
borers and sunburn by painting the trunk with 
diluted white latex paint or with whitewash.
Protection Offered: Besides preventing 
borer damage, the paint will reflect sunshine 
from the trunk, reducing the chance of sun­
burns or cracks from uneven trunk warming.
How to Use: Paint the tree trunk using 
white latex paint diluted with equal parts of 
water, or use whitewash. Extend your paint 
barrier from 1" below the soil line to 25”-30" 
up the trunk. To paint at the base of the trunk, 
use a hand trowel to remove the soil to a depth 
of several inches; replace the soil after the 
paint dries.
Rigid Plant and Row Covers
Before floating row covers became popular, 
innovative backyard gardeners built their own 
barriers from window-screening attached to 
wooden frames. The list of variations for home­
made barriers is limited only by your imagina­
tion and skills. Well-constructed and sturdy 
homemade covers should last for many years.
Protection Offered: Rigid barriers pro­
tect crops from damage by animals and a 
variety of insects. They prevent insects from 
transmitting disease problems as well. You 
can use rigid barriers as defense against the

BARRIERS ■ 
445
same pests for which floating row cover is 
effective.
How to Use: Make screen cones from 
aluminum screening. Cut sections of screen 
W
 X  2'. Wrap the shorter end around to form 
a cone, overlapping the edges. For stability, 
staple a wooden strip to the edge, so that it 
extends several inches below the base of the 
cone. Place cones over individual plants, in­
serting the wooden stakes into the soil to hold 
the cones in place. Sink the cone bottom in­
to the soil so pests can't crawl under. Remove 
the cones when plants outgrow them or when 
pests are no longer a threat.
You can also make individual plant tents 
from window screening by folding long sheets 
of screening in half, then attaching triangular 
sections with a stapler to seal the ends.
Make permanent covers by constructing 
wooden frames that fit over sections of your 
garden. Make them wide enough to fit over 
your beds or rows and tall enough to accom­
modate plant growth for as long as you intend 
to keep them over the plants. Frames with the 
top narrower than the bottom stack easily for 
winter storage. Staple screening or porous fab­
ric to the outside of the frames. Each fall, 
repair frames as needed, rinse them with a
10 percent bleach solution (1 part bleach to 
9 parts water) to prevent disease problems, 
and dry thoroughly before storing.
Seedling Protectors
Adult root maggot flies lay their eggs in 
soil at the base of young vegetable plants. 
When the maggots hatch, they don’t have far 
to travel to find their host. You can place 
paper barriers around seedlings as they emerge 
or as you transplant, to keep egg-laying flies 
away from the soil around your plants.
Protection Offered: Seedling disks pre­
vent root maggot flies from laying their eggs in 
the soil near susceptible seedlings like broccoli, 
cabbage, cauliflower, and onions. Tar paper
repels flies, offering added protection.
How to Use: Using tar paper or other 
heavy, flexible paper, cut circles 6"-8" in 
diameter. Make 1 cut from the edge to the 
center. You may want to cut a small hole in 
the center of the circle so the paper fits snugly 
around the stem but lies flat on the ground. 
When transplanting, place 1 disk on the soil 
around each plant so that the stem is in the 
middle of the disk. Circles aren’t magic 
shapes—squares work just as well. Since there 
will be several generations of root flies during 
the season, leave the covers in place until 
harvest.
Shade Cloths
Placed over rows of cool-season crops, 
shade cloth protects them from the scorching 
rays of the summer sun. It effectively extends 
the season for plants that normally prefer spring 
or fall temperatures.
Protection Offered: Because of its open 
weave, shade cloth offers little in the way of 
insect protection. It does, however, prevent 
injury from birds and small animals. It’s most 
often used to protect lettuce and other cool- 
season crops from extreme temperatures and 
damage caused by direct sunlight.
How to Use: When summer tempera­
tures reach 80°F or higher, suspend shade 
cloth over the crop to be protected, using 
stakes or other supports. Shade cloth is avail­
able in varying shade percentages that indi­
cate the amount of light reduction; choose 
one that shades your crop adequately without 
reducing light levels to the point that plants 
are stretching for sunlight.
Commercial Products: Handyshade, Sud­
den Shade, Weathashade
Trunk Bands
Trunk bands act as barriers and traps to 
control pests that crawl along tree trunks on 
their way to the foliage or to the soil.

446 ■ 
PHYSICAL CONTROLS
Protection Offered: Use bands to protect 
trees, vines, and shrubs from ants, codling 
moth and gypsy moth caterpillars, cutworms, 
leaf beetles, snails and slugs, and other pests 
that make daily trips along the trunk.
How to Use: You can apply most sticky 
coating products as a band directly on the 
plant you wish to protect, but it’s generally 
more desirable to apply them to a removable 
wrap. A sticky coating applied to a tree's bark 
may injure the tree or encourage fungal growth 
in the treated area. It is also much more diffi­
cult to remove the coating once it is clogged 
with pests; such coatings eventually wear off 
but are rather messy and unsightly until they do.
To control codling moth damage on apple 
trees, prevent mature larvae from returning to 
the soil to pupate. Apply bands when leaves 
unfold in the spring. Use a band of sticky 
ointment, or wrap corrugated cardboard around 
trunks at least W  above the soil. Cut 2" wide 
corrugated cardboard strips long enough to 
wrap around the trunk; staple or tape them in 
place. Large larvae will crawl into the corru­
gations to pupate. Remove the bands at least 
once each week and destroy the pupae inside.
Trunk bands can also prevent codling 
moths and other pests from crawling up the 
trunk in the first place. Apply bands of sticky 
coating to tree trunks and rose stems with a 
stick or paint stirrer; remove debris and pests
weekly and apply fresh material as needed. 
You can also buy foam-backed tree-banding 
strips to wrap around trunks. The foam forms 
a tight seal against rough bark, preventing 
insects from crawling under. Apply sticky coat­
ing to the band; when soiled, just remove and 
replace with fresh strips.
Folded burlap strips can also trap pests 
as they travel up the trunk. Cut a 20" wide 
strip of burlap fabric and wrap it around the 
trunk. Tie it to the tree with a cord in the 
middle of the strip, and let the top half fold 
down over the bottom, forming a pocket that 
will trap pests. You can apply a solution of 
parasitic nematodes to the burlap for added 
control. Seal bands at the edges with a layer of 
sticky ointment to prevent other pests from 
crawling under them.
Commercially prepared trunk bands are 
also available. Special adhesive tape with a 
slippery silicone finish prevents caterpillars 
from crossing when placed around a tree’s 
trunk. For extra protection, apply sticky oint­
ment at the edges and in a thin strip around 
the center of the tape. Snail-repellent tapes 
are also available to wrap around trunks. These 
have a sticky backing and are coated with 
cayenne pepper and salt to repel and kill slugs 
and snails.
Commercial Products: SIick'nStick

BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS
B iological pest control —controlling pests 
with their natural enemies—is a phenomenon 
as old as the pests themselves. It is also one of 
the most successful forms of pest control.
Garden pests and their natural enemies 
coexist in balanced populations in well-managed 
organic gardens. Unfortunately, natural pred­
ators and parasites don’t always provide relief 
from pests as quickly or as thoroughly as we 
would like. Their success depends on several 
factors, including climate, soil type, alternate 
sources of food and water, and the level of 
pest infestation. Some of these factors, such 
as the weather, are beyond your control. How­
ever, there are several things you can do to 
enhance the effectiveness of beneficial organ­
isms already present in your yard and garden. 
And in some cases, you can release commer­
cially reared predators and parasites around 
your yard to combat pest problems.
This section includes specific informa­
tion on animals, insects, and disease-causing 
microorganisms that you can use to help fight 
garden pests. If you’re not familiar with the 
terms used to describe these organisms, refer 
to “Insects’* beginning on page 254 for basic 
information on the life cycles of insects and 
to “Diseases” beginning on page 338 for a 
rundown on the types of organisms that cause 
disease.
The Biological Balance
Biological control ranges from encourag­
ing birds to visit your garden and eat pests to 
spraying microorganisms that can cause pests 
to sicken and die. An important aspect of 
biological control is making your garden attrac­
tive to the beneficial animals and insects that
can do much of the pest-control duty for you. 
There are also commercial insectaries that 
raise beneficial insects in mass quantities to 
sell to farmers and gardeners. One biological 
control product has become a best-seller— BT, 
the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis, which 
infects and kills a broad range of chewing 
caterpillar pests.
Encouraging Beneficials
The natural enemies of garden pests are 
often overlooked when gardeners consider their 
pest-control options. In fact, more beneficial 
organisms visit your plants than do pests.
Beneficial organisms go unnoticed be­
cause they’re inconspicuous in size and habit. 
They’re so efficient, you may never have real­
ized that pests were there. Even so, pest out­
breaks are clouds with silver linings since they 
attract more beneficials to your garden. It's a 
good idea to encourage natural enemies when­
ever you can. There are several ways to attract 
them to your garden, and keep them there.
Food
Predators and parasites often rely on 
nonpest food sources in addition to pests. 
Many beneficials that eat pests supplement 
their diets with pollen. nectar, or other insects, 
enabling them to survive when their target 
pests are scarce. And while birds will feast on 
insect pests, they may first be attracted to 
your yard by a well-stocked bird feeder.
Alternate food sources will help keep ben­
eficial insects in your garden and are often 
necessary in order for the beneficials to 
reproduce. Some parasitic wasps, for example, 
lay more eggs after feasting on plant nectar. 
Green lacewings eat aphid honeydew to boost
{continued on page 450)
4 4 7

448 ■ 
BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS
Important Native Beneficial Insects
Name
Pests Attacked
Comments
How to Attract
Aphid midge
Aphidoletes
aphidimyzo
Over 6 0  species of 
aphids.
Very common, globally dis­
tributed, and hardy nearly 
to the Arctic circle. Especially 
attracted to aphids in roses, 
shrubs, ond orchard trees.
Plant nectar-producing 
plants; shelter garden from 
strong winds; provide water 
during dry spells.
A ssassin bugs
(Family Reduviidae)
M any insects, including 
caterpillars, flies.
Robust, voracious insects, 
with strong beoks to attack 
prey; will squeak when 
handled; can inflict a pain­
ful bite.
Provide shelter in perm a­
nent plantings.
Bigeyed bugs
Geocoris spp.
Aphids, small cater­
pillars, leafhoppers,
They may resemble tar­
nished plant bugs or chinch
Collect them from pigweed 
or goldenrod stands and
spider mites, tarnished 
plant bugs.
bugs; their big black eyes 
are a distinctive trait.
transfer them to your gar­
den; plant alfalfa clover, or 
soybeans a s cover crops or 
borders.
Braconld wasps
(Family Braconidae)
Aphids, armyworms, 
beetle larvae, codling 
moths, European corn 
borers, flies, gypsy 
moths, imported cab­
bageworms, other cater­
pillars and insects.
Rigidly mummified aphids 
or dying caterpillars with 
white cocoons stuck to their 
backs are signs that braco- 
nids have been at work.
Grow  nectar-producing 
plants with sm all flowers.
Damsel bugs
(Family Nabidae)
Aphids, small caterpillars, 
leafhoppers, plant bugs, 
thrips, treehoppers.
These 
gray or 
brown bugs are com m on 
and important predators in 
orchards and alfalfa fields 
(where you can collect them 
for your garden).
Collect them from alfalfa 
fields and transfer them to 
your garden; plant an alfalfa 
border around the garden.
Ground beetles
(Family Carabidae)
Most prey on soil-dwelling 
pests, such a s cabbage 
root maggots, cutworms, 
slugs and snails; som e 
pursue aboveground 
pests, such as Colorado 
potato beetle larvae, 
gypsy moths, tent cater­
pillars.
Exceptionally long-lived 
(adults live up to 2 years), 
most active at night.
Provide permanent beds, 
plant sod pathways, and 
allow som e weeds, espe­
cially pigweed; minimize 
tillage during the growing 
season; plant white clover 
a s a groundcover in 
orchards.
Copyrighted material

THE BIOLOGICAL BALANCE 
■ 
449
Name 
Pests Attacked 
Comments 
How to Attract
Hover flies/flower 
flies
(Family Syrphidae)
Many species of aphids.
These insects hover over 
flowers and dort ow ay like 
miniature hummingbirds. 
They often lay eggs in young 
aphid colonies to ensure 
that larvoe will have enough 
prey.
Plant pollen- and nectar- 
producing flowers and 
encourage weeds such as 
wild carrots and yarrow; 
avoid pesticide use.
Ichneumon wasps
(Family
Ichneumonidae)
Caterpillars, sawfly and 
beetle larvae, other 
insects.
Although most ichneumon 
w asps are very small, some 
are frighteningly large with 
long, threadlike ovipositors 
trailing behind; they connot 
sting people.
Plant pollen- and nectar- 
producing flowers; grow 
flowering cover crops in 
orchards.
Lacewings
Chrysopena 
(-Chrysopa) spp.
Soft-bodied insects- 
including aphids, mealy­
bugs, thrips-sm all 
caterpillars, mites, moth 
eggs, some scales.
The delicote adults flutter 
erratically in a zigzag 
flight through the garden at 
dusk; their voracious larvae 
are known o s aphid lions.
Plant pollen- and nectar- 
producing plants and allow 
flowering weeds such as 
dandelions ond goldenrod; 
provide a source of water 
during dry spells.
Lady beetles
(Family
Coccinellidae)
Aphids, mealybugs, soft 
scales, spider mites.
Lody beetles abound in 
many sizes and colors, 
including solid black, ash 
gray, and yellow or orange 
with black spots or irregular 
blotches.
Plant pollen- and nectar- 
producing flowers; allow 
weeds such a s dandelions, 
wild carrots, and yarrow; 
protect eggs, larvae, and 
pupae on plants.
Minute pirate bug
Orius tristicolor
Small caterpillars, leaf- 
hopper nymphs, spider 
mites, thrips, eggs of 
many insects.
These plentiful, black-and- 
white harlequin bugs are 
easy to spot. Look for them 
in corn silks and stinging 
nettles; shake them into a 
jar and release them in the 
garden.
Plant alfalfa or other pollen- 
producing plants; encourage 
goldenrod and yarrow.
Rove beetles
(Family
Staphytinidae)
Many prey on aphids, fly 
eggs, maggots, nema­
todes, springtails; some 
ore parasites on cabbage 
root m aggots or other fly 
larvae.
Often mistaken for earwigs, 
rove beetles are usually 
smaller and have no pincers; 
more than 3,000 species in 
North America.
Maintain permanent plant­
ings to protect the local 
population, interplant with 
cover crops or mulch plant­
ing beds; make permanent 
pathways in the garden
(continued!
Copyrighted material

450 
■ 
BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS
Important Native Beneficial Insects — Continued
Name
Pests Attacked
Comments
How to Attract
Soldier beetles
(Family Cantharidae)
Aphids, beetle larvae, 
including cucumber 
beetles, caterpillars, 
grasshopper eggs.
Unlike most beetles, soldier 
beetles have leathery rather 
than hard wing covers.
Keep pollen-rich plants and 
weeds around the garden 
for adult feeding; keep 
permanent plantings in the 
garden to provide refuge 
and protect pupating 
beetles.
Spined soldier bug
Podisus moculiventris
Fall armyworms, hairless 
caterpillars, including 
tent caterpillars, sawfly 
larvae; beetle larvae 
such a s those of Colo­
rado potato beetle and 
Mexican bean beetle.
These resemble stink bugs, 
but spined soldier bugs 
have sharp points on the 
"shoulders" of the thorax.
Maintain permanent beds 
of perennials to provide 
shelter.
Tachlnid flies
(Family
Tachinidae)
Many species of cater­
pillars, including army­
worms, cabbage loopers, 
cutworms, gypsy moths, 
tent caterpillars; also 
Japanese beetles. May 
beetles, sawflies, 
squash bugs.
One of the largest and 
most beneficial groups of 
flies, they are often mis­
taken for houseflies.
Grow plants rich in pollen 
and nectar; leave some 
garden weeds, especially 
goldenrod, wild carrots, and 
pigweed; don't kill cater­
pillars with white eggs 
stuck to their backs (the 
eggs will become the next 
generation of flies).
Tiger beetles
(Family
Cicindelidae)
Both adults and larvae 
prey on ants, aphids, 
beetles, caterpillars, 
flies, grasshoppers, 
spiders, other insects.
These insects are slow 
developers; larvae spend 
2-3 years in their burrows 
before becoming spectacu­
larly beautiful adults with 
bright, iridescent colors.
Maintain permanent beds in 
the garden as refuge; don't 
leave outdoor lights on all 
night or use light traps, 
because tiger beetles are 
highly attracted to light.
their egg production, and syrphid flies require 
a meal of pollen before they can lay eggs.
Assist natural enem ies by including 
small-flowered, food-bearing companion plants 
in your landscape. Choose from members of 
the carrot family (Umbelliferae), which includes 
caraway,dill, fennel, lovage,and parsley. Many
mint family (Labiatae) members such as catnip, 
hyssop, and lemon balm are important nectar 
plants. Rosemary, thyme, and other herbs are 
attractive to both gardeners and beneficials. 
Members of the daisy family (Compositae), 
including coneflowers, daisies, and yarrow, are 
excellent sources of both pollen and nectar.

THE BIOLOGICAL BALANCE 
■ 
451
Plants otherwise considered weeds might be 
useful wild food sources: corn spurry, golden­
rod, lamb's-quarters, wild mustard, and Queen 
Anne’s lace attract beneficial insects.
Cover crops are good sources of food and 
shelter. Buckwheat is an excellent choice, since 
it's easily worked into the garden season and 
quickly provides masses of blooms and cover 
to attract natural enemies. Try using alfalfa, 
buckwheat, clover, or ivy (Hedera spp.) as 
borders around the garden.
You can purchase bug food from suppli­
ers of beneficial insects or from mail-order 
garden supply companies. This artificial diet 
usually contains yeast, sugar, and added vita­
mins and is placed in sheltered areas among 
garden plants when natural food supplies 
arc low.
Water
Like animals and plants, beneficial insects 
require water. If rain is plentiful locally, pud­
dles of water or morning dew are probably 
sufficient. During a drought, provide water in 
shallow containers filled with rocks that serve 
as insect perches. Change the water often to 
discourage mosquito pests. Also consider sit­
ing a deeper water source somewhere in your 
yard to help encourage a toad to call your 
garden home.
Shelter
Beneficials need protection from wind 
and weather extremes. When other parts of 
the garden are being tilled, mowed, sprayed, 
or harvested, beneficial insects seek out alter­
native cover. Provide them with hedgerows, 
flowering shrubs, cover crops, perennial bor­
ders, and mulches like newspaper or compost 
as resting and hiding places. To encourage 
soil-dwelling beneficials like ground beetles 
and rove beetles, plant in permanent beds and 
put down stone mulches to provide lots of
hiding places. Avoid excess tillage, because it 
will destroy or disturb beneficials. The dust 
cloud created by tillage eventually settles on 
plants and may harm the more delicate bene­
ficials, such as parasitic wasps. Excessive till­
age also alters the soil environment and may 
harm populations of beneficial soil microor­
ganisms (see "Soil Tillage’’ on page 427).
Environment
Just as gardeners don’t consume every 
kernel of corn but save some for next year's 
crop, biocontrols rarely kill 1(X) percent of the 
pests they prey upon. Don’t be tempted to 
spray those few remaining pests—they will 
provide the next generation of beneficials with 
food. Spraying with broad spectrum insecti­
cides upsets the balance of beneficials and 
their prey.
In the wild, beneficials and harmful organ­
isms often follow a natural oscillating rhythm 
of population highs and lows. Pest numbers 
may rise suddenly in response to some envi­
ronmental cue. such as an increase in their 
food supply. Populations of beneficial organ­
isms will increase accordingly. As a result, 
pest numbers decline, followed by a corre­
sponding drop in numbers of beneficials. The 
cycle is repeated continuously each season in 
your garden. If you notice a certain pest pop­
ulation is on the rise, it may be worth the wait 
to let the beneficials move in and perform 
rather than reaching for pesticides immediately. 
Become familiar with common natural ene­
mies so you’ll know when to rely on them.
Many botanical insecticides, including 
pyrethrin, are broad-spectrum pesticides that 
kill a wide range of insects. Beneficials are 
often included among the dead. Also, spraying 
recklessly for one pest may result in the devel­
opment of secondary pests. When you spray a 
broad-spectrum pesticide that also kills off 
many beneficials, some pest that survives the 
spraying and is now unchecked by a natural

452 
■ 
BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS
enemy may become a new problem. Pests like 
aphids are often able to recover more quickly 
than their natural controls, so outbreaks of 
aphids are common after the application of a 
broad-spectrum insecticide. Frequent spraying 
can also encourage populations of pesticide- 
resistant insects to increase, and pest species 
usually develop resistance more quickly than
beneficial species do.
Keeping the soil environment healthy can 
also be important in preventing plant disease. 
Organically enriched soils have high popula­
tions of beneficial microbes that feed upon or 
outcompete pathogens. Preserve a healthy bal­
ance in your soils by adding compost or other 
organic soil amendments on a yearly basis.
Buying Beneficial Insects
I
f your notive noturol controls need a s s is ­
tance, you m ay c h o o se  to buy beneficial 
insects. Several garden supply catalo gs offer 
beneficial insects am o ng their products, and 
private insectaries offer a w ide assortm ent. 
Keep in m ind that m ost types of beneficials 
are reared at only one or a few insectaries. 
The size of the crop of beneficials m ay vary 
depending on the su c c e ss of the insectaries' 
breeding efforts. You'll be com peting with 
com m ercial grow ers and garden supply com ­
panies for w hat m ay be a limited supply of 
beneficials. Availability of specific species can 
ch an ge  from year to year. (For the m ost recent 
list of com panies that specialize in raising 
an d  selling biocontrols, contact the Califor­
nia Departm ent of Food ond Agriculture, Bio­
lo g ic a l C ontrol S e rv ic e s P ro gram , 3 2 8 8  
M eadow view  Road, Sacram ento, C A  9 5 8 3 2 .)
Purchased beneficials need special core 
or they can easily die before they get a chance 
to do their job. Follow these ste p s w hen pur­
ch a sin g  an d  releasing beneficials.
■  
Becom e familiar with the life cycle of 
the target pest; know  w here a nd  w hen to find 
e g g s and larvae in your garden. U se garden 
b o o ks with go o d  illustrations or photographs 
to help you.
■  Identify the natural enem ies available 
for control of your pest and  locate a source. 
Consult with your supplier to be certain you're 
buying the best biological control for the pest.
■  W hen the beneficials arrive, study the 
instructions for storage and release; each 
beneficial o rgan ism  is unique and m ust be 
treated differently. Release them a s  so o n  a s 
you can; if you can't release them immediately, 
follow the instructions for proper storage.
■  Release them  at the proper rote and 
location. Rate of release will depend on the 
size of your garden or greenhouse and  the 
severity of your pest infestation. Take a good 
look at the beneficials before releasing, so  
you don't confuse them for a pest later.
■  Once you've released beneficials, m on­
itor their progress. If you're releasing egg 
parasites, w atch for discolored pest e g g s 
with o d d -shap ed  exit holes. Parasitized lar­
vae often becom e discolored and inactive. If 
necessary, m ake several releases to keep a 
major pest under control. O nce released, som e 
natural enem ies ore vigoro us enough to su r­
vive from  year to year. Others m ay require 
annual releases if they aren't able to survive 
your a re a 's climate year-round.

BENEFICIAL ANIMALS AND INSECTS ■ 453
Beneficial Animals 
and Insects
We can rely on an assorted crew of large 
and small creatures to help with pest control. 
The list of beneficial animals ranges from 
birds and toads to spiders and predatory’ nema­
todes. Beneficial insects include the familiar 
lady beetle along with less well known preda­
tory bugs and parasitic wasps.
Large Animals
Mammals are often overlooked for their 
pest-control abilities. For example, in Cana­
dian forests, shrews control larch sawflies and 
other pests. Lizards and toads are important 
natural enemies of pest insects, and snakes 
can help control problems with mice and voles. 
In many communities in Europe and North 
America, farmers encourage birds to control 
pests by placing nesting boxes around their 
fields. Even domesticated animals can assist 
in pest control. If you have a small orchard 
and keep chickens, let the chickens feed in the 
orchard. They will peck pests such as plum 
curculios out of dropped fruit and other ground 
litter.
How to Encourage: Encourage or dis­
courage these large and small animals as nec­
essary in your garden. Naturally, you’ll probably 
want to keep out those animals that cause 
more damage than benefit. But it may be time 
to reconsider some of your prejudices when 
assessing the harmfulness of certain animals. 
If you're the squeamish type, have patience 
with the snakes that cross your garden paths— 
they’re great rodent controllers! Also remem­
ber that bats are generally harmless to people, 
but they can consum e huge num bers of 
mosquitoes, flies, and other pests.
If water is scarce, place small containers 
filled to the brim in shady locations for thirsty 
animals. Build birdhouses to attract the insect-
eating birds, and place the houses along the 
garden’s border.
Insects
One of the best steps you can take to 
reduce pest insects is to encourage nonpest 
insects such as lady beetles and lacewings. 
You can also buy beneficial insects and release 
them in your garden. This approach works 
better with some species than others. For 
example, purchased convergent lady beetles 
released in your garden may not be there long 
because their instinct tells them to migrate 
elsewhere.
For information on many of the benefi­
cial insects that may be present naturally in 
your garden, see “Important Native Benefi­
cial Insects’’ on page 448. For details on how 
and when to release beneficials that are com­
mercially available from garden suppliers and 
insectaries, see “Buying and Releasing Bene­
ficial Insects’ on page 454. If you’d like more 
information about particular types of insects 
mentioned in those listings, look them up in 
the “Insect Identification Guide” beginning 
on page 268.
Predatory Mites
Predatory mites are less than */»" 8-legged 
creatures that are related to spiders. In your 
garden, predatory mites live in the soil, in 
compost piles, and on your plants. Soil-dwelling 
species usually reside in the upper 2" of the 
soil, preying on other mites and insects. Spe­
cies that live on garden plants consume other 
mites and their eggs; some types also feed on 
thrips. Still other species provide valuable pest 
control in stored grains.
Predatory mites are useful biological con­
trols because they reproduce quickly, keeping 
pace with oscillating pest populations: Some 
are able to complete their life cycle in 1 week. 
If you observe mites through a magnifying 
glass, you can distinguish predatory mites from
(continued on page 457)

454 
■ 
BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS
Buying and Releasing Beneficial Insects
I
nsectaries and garden supply c a ta lo g s otter a w ide variety of beneficial in se cts and  predatory mites, 
but the first step to getting go o d  results is to be absolutely certain that the insect you purchase will prey 
on the pests you're trying to control. You also need to be sure that you buy the correct num ber of in se cts for 
your garden size. Here you'll find all the inform ation you need to sh o p  w isely for beneficial insects.
Beneficial 
How and Where
Species 
Pests Attacked 
to Use 
Comments
Aphid midge
Aphidoletes
ophidimyzo
Over 6 0  species of 
aphids.
Apply 2 5 0  cocoons in a 
sm all garden or green­
house or use 3 -5  cocoons 
per plant; repeat in 2 
weeks; use 5 -2 0  cocoons 
per fruit tree.
Reliable except in dry, 
windy areas; not suitable 
for melon aphid control.
Aphid parasites
Aphidius 
matricariae, 
Lysiphlebus 
testoceipes, 
other species
Apple aphids, green 
peach aphids, melor 
aphids, others.
Release 5 0 -1 0 0  pupae of 
i 
these parasitic w a sp s in a 
garden or small green­
house early in spring.
Experimental; best effect if 
used with aphid predators.
Colorado potato 
beetle parasite
(Edovum puttleri)
Parasitizes e ggs of 
Best effect seen against 
Colorado potato beetle. 
second generation of
potato beetles. Become 
established faster when 
there is o source of honey­
dew from aphids neorby.
Experimental; not hardy in 
northern areas.
Lacewings
Chrysoperlo 
(=Chrysopa) spp.
Soft-bodied insects -  
Scatter 5 0 0 -1 ,0 0 0  eggs 
including aphids, mealy- 
throughout an average 
bugs, thrips-sm all 
garden, 
caterpillars, mites, 
moth eggs, som e 
scales.
Unreliable due to poor 
survival during shipping, 
but survivors are effective.
Lady beetles
Hippodamio
convergens
Aphids, mealybugs, 
soft scales, spider 
mites.
Not recommended for 
outdoor release; use in 
greenhouses at a rate of 
3 -5  beetles per plant 
or 5 0 0  per home green­
house.
Unreliable outdoors due to 
migration, unless released 
over community-wide area, 
other species good candi­
dates for outdoor releases.
Copyrighted material

BENEFICIAL ANIMALS AND INSECTS ■ 
455
Beneficial 
How and Where
Species 
Pests Attacked 
to Use 
Comments
Mealybug destroyer, 
also called 
Australian lady 
beetle
Cryptolaemus
montrouzieri
Mealybugs indoors and 
in citrus orchards.
Release 2-5 beetles per 
infested plant in green­
houses, 1 or 2 times per 
year; for infested house­
plants, confine 10-20 
beetles to each plant for 
4 -6  weeks; in citrus and 
grapes, release 2 5 0 -5 0 0  
per 14 acre.
Used for decades in citrus 
groves; reliable in summer; 
slow indoors in winter.
Minute pirate bug
Orius tristicolor,
0. insidiosus
Small caterpillars, leaf- 
hopper nymphs, spider 
mites, thrips, eggs of 
many insects.
Release 1 bug per 1 -2 
plants in greenhouses; try 
5 0 -1 0 0  in a home garden.
Expenmental, studied in 
commercial greenhouses 
only.
Predatory mite
Phytoseiulus
persimilis
Spider mites, especially 
Pacific and two-spotted 
spider mite.
Release 2 -1 0  mites per 
plant on strawberries or 
garden or greenhouse 
plants at first sign of 
spider mites, repeat if 
necessary in 2-3 weeks, 
not winter hardy in most 
of U.S.; doesn't perform 
well on tomatoes.
Reliable, except in hot, dry 
conditions
Predatory mite
Amblyseius
cucumeris
Western flower thrips, 
cyclamen mites, onion 
thrips, spider mites.
Apply 100-200 per 
infested plant to control 
thrips; effect is slow 
because mites cannot kill 
adult thrips; cold-hardy 
and will become estab­
lished in strawberries to 
control cyclamen mites.
Reliable thrips control on 
greenhouse peppers; 
unreliable on cucumbers.
western predatory 
mite
Metaseiulus
(=Typhlodromus)
occidentalis
Spider mites, especially 
citrus red mites and 
European red mites.
Establish in orchards with 
rates of 5 0 -1 0 0  mites per 
tree in summer or early fall; 
apply 1,000 per tree to 
control infestation of 
spider mites in same 
season; hardy in most 
apple-growing regions.
Reliable; pesticide- 
resistant strains available.
( c o n t i n u e d )
Copyrighted material

Buying and Releasing Beneficial Insects — Continued
Beneficial 
| 
How and Where
Species 
Pests Attacked 
to Use 
Comments
Praying mantid
Mantis religiosa
Any insect they can 
catch, including bene­
ficial species.
Not advisable to release 
in garden because of 
destructive effect on 
native species.
Not effective as control for 
pest insects.
Scale predatory 
beetles
Chilocoms 
nigntus, Lindoms 
lophanthae
Soft scales, especially 
soft brown scale.
Minimum order of several 
hundred sufficient for a 
greenhouse; confine 
10-20 beetles for a month 
to an infested houseplant.
Reliable, especially indoors.
Soil mite
Geolaelaps 
(=Hypoaspis) spp.
Fungus gnats, spring- 
tails, thrips pupae.
Sprinkle granular carrier 
containing mites on soil 
around plants; apply 1 
quart per 1,000 square 
feet once early in season 
to establish population.
Reliable on fungus gnats 
when established early.
Spined soldier bug
Podisus moculivenths
Hairless caterpillars. 
Release 2-5 per square
including fall army 
yard of bean or potato
worms, sawfly larvae, 
patch to control beetle
tent caterpillars; beetle 
larvae.
larvae such as those of
Colorado potato beetle
and Mexican bean
beetle.
Expenmental; results best 
on tent caterpillars and 
bean beetles; not very 
promising on Colorado 
potato beetles.
Trichogramma
wasps
Trichogramma 
minutum, other 
species
Eggs of over 200 
species of moths suer 
as com borers, corn 
earworms, codling 
moths, cotton boll- 
worms, spruce 
budworms.
For codling moths, release 
i 
5,000-7,000 per tree, at 
5-7 day intervals through­
out month when moths 
are flying,- try 5,000-7,000 
per square foot to control 
corn borers, use phero­
mone traps to determine 
moth populations and 
time releases effectively.
Most effective in large 
numbers over large crop 
areas.
Whitefly parasite
EncarsKJ formosa
Greenhouse whiteflies 
sweetpotato whitefliej
Release 1,000 wasps in a 
s. 
small greenhouse or 2-5 
parasites per plant when 
the first whiteflies are 
seen; repeat in 1 -2 weeks; 
double releases for sweet­
potato whiteflies.
Reliable on greenhouse 
whiteflies if released while 
pest numbers are extrem­
ely low; unlikely to succeed 
in winter months; works 
best in warm, bright 
conditions.
456
Copyrighted material

BENEFICIAL ANIMALS AND INSECTS ■ 457
spider mites by their faster movement and 
oval shape. Their beneficial effects are often 
hardly noticed until they are killed off by 
pesticide sprays; the subsequent population 
explosion in spider mites highlights their 
importance.
Several species are available from insect 
suppliers for controlling pests in the garden, 
orchard, vineyard, and greenhouse. Phytosei- 
ulus persimilis is the most widely sold species 
for spider mite control. In hot greenhouses 
and gardens (temperatures greater than 90°F), 
try Amblyseius californicus or Phytoseiulus 
longipes. Metaseiulus occidentalis is an excel­
lent hardy predator of European red mite in 
apple orchards and berry patches, surviving 
as far north as the Canadian apple-growing 
regions. Once established, it should only need 
to be re-released after a severe winter or other 
disruption to the population.
How to Release: Predatory mites are usu­
ally sold as a mix of several species to ensure 
complete control under a variety of conditions, 
because each species has overlapping humidity, 
temperature, and prey requirements. In the 
greenhouse or garden, order about 1.000 pred­
atory mites for every 200-500 square feet. Shake 
the carrier and mites out among your plants. 
The mites are so small you may not be able to 
spot them in the mixture, but rest assured they 
will travel among your plants as necessary to 
find pests.
For fruit trees, if European red mite num­
bers are low and you just want to establish a 
predator population for future years, release 
50-100 per tree; if you want to control an 
outbreak during the same season, release 1,000 
per tree.
Nematodes
Mention nematodes and most gardeners 
picture the parasitic type that infests plant 
root systems. The beneficial nematodes such 
as Steinernema (=Neoplectana) carpocapsae 
and Heterorhabditis heliothidis almost make
up for the damage their relatives cause. They're 
both known for quick control of insect pests 
that spend part of their lives in your garden soil.
Immature larvae of both species have a 
protective cuticle. They aggressively search 
for hosts, usually in or near the soil. Once the 
host is located, the nematode enters its body 
through natural openings, such as the mouth 
or spiracles, shedding the cuticle it no longer 
needs. Beneficial nematodes carry an intesti­
nal bacterium (Xenorhabdus spp.) that is 
released inside the new host, paralyzing and 
killing it within 24 to 48 hours. Once the host 
is dead, the nematode completes several gen­
erations within the carcass until host tissues 
are depleted. Larvae then redevelop the pro­
tective cuticle and leave the carcass in search 
of a new host. Larvae in this protected state 
can survive in the soil without a host for as 
long as 1 year if moisture levels and temper­
atures remain favorable.
Nematodes require a moist, dark envi­
ronment. As temperatures drop in the winter, 
they burrow deeper in the soil and begin hiber­
nation; as temperatures rise in spring, they 
move closer to the soil surface. Their return 
lags behind the arrival of early spring pests, so 
for early pest control, gardeners must reintro­
duce the nematodes each year.
In the laboratory, over 250 species of pests 
fall prey to beneficial nematodes. Outdoors, 
however, uncontrolled soil temperatures and 
moisture reduce their efficiency. Steinernema 
carpocapsae lives closest to the soil surface 
and successfully controls carpenterworms, cur­
rant borers, earwigs, navel orangeworms, onion 
maggots, pillbugs. seedcom maggots, sod web­
worms, sowbugs, and strawberry root weevils. 
Heterorhabditis heliothidis ranges deeper in 
soil, effectively controlling billbugs, black vine 
weevils, corn rootworm larvae, Japanese bee­
tle grubs, masked chafers, mole crickets, and 
wireworms. Both types of nematodes show 
promise against armyworms, cabbage root mag­
gots, codling moth larvae, Colorado potato

458 ■ BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS
beetle larvae, cutworms, and rose chafers.
How to Release: Rate of application 
depends on the susceptibility of the target 
pest, its location in reference to the damaged 
plant, and the particular species or strain of 
nematode supplied. Commercial suppliers vary 
in the strain of nematodes they raise; you may 
have a choice of several strains or species. 
Consult with specialists at your supply source 
for the most appropriate species and the most 
efficient method of application. Always fol­
low the suppliers’ label directions.
The nematodes arrive in the infective lar­
val stage, either dehydrated or suspended in 
gels, sponges, or moist peat and vermiculite. 
It’s best to release them when pest larvae are 
known to be present. Mix the formulations 
thoroughly with water, then apply to the soil 
with a watering can or pressure sprayer. At 
planting time, treat a 3" wide band centered 
over the row. Control pests of perennial plants 
by spraying at the base of the plants. To con­
trol pests in sod, spray nematodes evenly over 
the grass with a watering can or sprayer, or 
pour them direcdy onto the grass: Use 100,000- 
500,000 nematodes per square yard. Water the 
nematodes in well; apply *6"-l"of water after 
spraying to soak them into the sod. Control is 
most successful when nematodes are applied 
to moist soil in the late afternoon or evening. 
Treatment may be less successful in lawns 
with thatch, which impedes the progress of 
the nematodes into the root zone.
Since the nematodes are susceptible to 
drying, control is less effective when applied 
directly to plants. It may take more than 6 
weeks before you know whether treatments 
were effective. Parasitized hosts will appear 
chalky white, reddish, or gray.
To control borers in trees, mix nema­
todes according to label directions, and use 
an oilcan to squirt the nematodes into the 
hole (about 17,000 nematodes per squirt). Or 
use a syringe to inject nematodes into squash
vines to control squash borers or in corn silks 
to control corn earworms. Syringes are usu­
ally marked in cubic centimeters (cc); you’ll 
be adding about 5,000 nematodes in 2 cc of 
the prepared mix.
Decollate Snails
Decollate snails (Rumina decollataj prey 
on the brown garden snail (Helix aspersa). 
This predatory snail, with an elongated, cone- 
shaped shell, efficiently controls the pest spe­
cies but will consume your young vegetable 
plants if other food is unavailable. They are 
available for release in certain parts of 
California, but they should not be released in 
home gardens. Commercial citrus growers 
release them in citrus groves, where they con­
trol pest snails without damaging the trees.
Spiders
The easiest way to tell a spider from an 
insect is by counting the number of legs: Spi­
ders have 4 pairs while insects move about on 
only 3 pairs. Spiders come in a great variety 
of sizes, shapes, and colors. They’re the preda­
tors you’re likely to encounter most often in 
your garden, yard, and home.
Insects are the most popular items on the 
spider’s menu. Spiders capture their insect 
prey with unusual tactics. They weave traps 
with the silk threads produced by spinnerets. 
The multipurpose silk is woven into coverings 
for eggs; parachutes for travel; and snares, 
drag lines, and webs for capturing prey. Some 
spiders, including common wolf spiders, are 
adequately large and fast to chase their prey 
down. As soon as they have hold of their prey, 
they inject digestive fluids that liquefy the tis­
sues, then they suck the shell dry. Almost all 
spiders are poisonous, but only a few have 
venom toxic enough to threaten humans.
Daddy longlegs are closely related to 
spiders. Often called harvestmen, they’ll eat 
just about anything, including scraps from the

BENEFICIAL MICROORGANISMS ■ 459
kitchen table. They're most active at night, 
patrolling garden plants for infestations of small 
insect pests. Like spiders, they have 8 legs. 
Their legs are easily shed but don’t grow back. 
By the end of the summer, many daddy longlegs 
are getting about adequately on only a few legs.
How to Encourage: Depending on their 
size and stage of life, spiders and daddy longlegs 
are susceptible to the same pesticides used to 
kill insects, so refrain from spraying. Solicit 
their help in the garden by leaving them alone 
when you encounter them in webs strung 
between the plants or under stones or debris 
on the soil.
Beneficial Microorganisms
Unlike introduced beneficial insects, which 
require exact conditions if they are to work 
well, microbial and biological insecticides can 
tolerate a range of environmental conditions. 
However, they do require some understanding 
of both the pest and the remedy if they are to 
work well. Fbr example, spraying BT (Bacillus 
thuringiensis) on your broccoli plants will effec­
tively control imported cabbageworms. How­
ever, it will do nothing to stop aphids feeding 
on those same plants, because the bacteria 
cannot infect aphids. And while milky disease 
spores kill Japanese beetle grubs, they have 
no affect on adult Japanese beetles. Always 
read instructions and follow them exactly when 
using biological pesticides.
The specific nature of biological pesticides, 
like BT, means that you can use them without 
destroying the natural balance that exists 
between pests and predators. There is no dan­
ger of pollution or residual toxicity when such 
pesticides are properly used. Still, there may 
be occasions when it’s best to wait and see 
what kind of pest-predator relationships de­
velop before you reach for a biological pesticide. 
For example, if you place a bird feeder close 
to cabbage or broccoli, the birds may con­
sume leaf-eating worms for you, eliminating 
the need for treatment with BT. Because bio­
logical insecticides are host-specific, they are 
not toxic to people. However, it still pays to 
follow proper spray procedures for best results. 
See "Spray Safely” on page 463 and “The Way 
to Spray” on page 465 for information on how 
and when to spray pesticides and on the best 
types of application equipment to use.
Remember to use cultural methods, includ­
ing plant selection, soil care, timely cultivation, 
and crop rotation, before considering biologi­
cal control. Biological pesticides are much 
gentler to the environment than chemical 
agents, but they are pesticides just the same. 
Although their impact may be small and finely 
tuned, they can still disturb the natural balance 
that exists on any site between soil, plants, pests, 
and predators. Using microbes to control gar­
den pests is an active area of research; be on 
the lookout for new microbial insecticides.
B a c illu s  th u r in g ie n s is
The most widely used microbial biologi­
cal control method is the application of Bacil­
lus thuringiensis. or BT. Scientists have 
identified more than 35 varieties of this bacte­
rium; several are available to home gardeners 
for controlling various larval insect pests. B.t. 
var. kurstaki (BTK) was one of the first bacte­
rial pest controls offered on the market. BTK 
produces crystal toxins that poison, paralyze, 
and kill various common pest caterpillars. After 
BTK is applied to plants, caterpillar pests 
ingest it as they feed. Although the pest may 
live several more days, it stops feeding, dark­
ens in color, and eventually drops to the soil. 
BTK effectively controls a wide range of cat­
erpillars including cabbage loopers, codling 
moth larvae, diamondback moths, gypsy moth 
larvae, im ported cabbagew orm s, spruce 
budworms, tomato homworms, and others. 
Consult the label for a complete list of suscep­
tible pests.

460 ■ BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS
B.t. var. israelensis (BTI) attacks larvae 
of blackflies, fungus gnats, and mosquitoes 
when applied to standing water where these 
pests reproduce. B.t. var. san diego (BTSD) 
controls certain leaf-feeding beetles, includ­
ing black vine weevils, boll weevils, Colorado 
potato beetles, and elm leaf beetles.
BT products are selective —they will not 
harm the great majority of beneficial insects 
in your garden. However, butterfly larvae are 
caterpillars and will be infected by BT. So 
don't spray BT indiscriminately throughout 
the garden: Limit applications to plants you 
know are infested by pests.
BT will not infect wormlike pests excluded 
from the label, like slugs or leafminers. BT is 
considered nontoxic to people.
Although it was once thought that insects 
would not develop resistance to microbial 
insecticides, scientists have confirmed cases 
of diamondback moths in commercial farms 
that showed resistance. This is another argu- 
ment for using BT with care, and only after 
trying cultural or physical control methods 
for which resistance is not a factor.
How to Use: You can purchase BT in 
many forms, including liquids, powders, dusts, 
and granules. Follow label directions for either 
dusting on plants or preparing and applying a 
batch of spray solution. If sprays roll off leaves 
rather than adhering to them, add a few drops 
of liquid dish soap to the spray solution to 
enhance sticking.
Adding a commercial appetite stimulant 
to the BT spray solution may encourage pests 
to eat more of the treated leaves. While this 
increases the likelihood that the pests will in­
gest the BT, it could also lead to more severe 
plant damage; this is especially true if the 
appetite stimulant has a longer residual effect 
than the BT. Appetite stimulants have not been 
scientifically tested, but you may wish to experi­
ment with them in your own garden.
To control mosquitoes and flies, add BTI
to standing water in ponds, puddles, storm 
drains, and other wet areas. BTI has no harm­
ful effects on fish or amphibians. To control 
fungus gnats in the greenhouse, apply BTI as 
a drench to soil on benches, floors, and in 
large pots.
You can prepare a BT/bran bait for con­
trolling cutworms by moistening bran with a 
dilute solution of BTK. Sprinkle the moist 
bran on the surface of planting beds 2 weeks 
before you plan to plant.
Store BT products in a cool, dark place 
to retain viability for several years. Use a fresh 
batch for each application and use it within 
several days. BT products break down quickly 
in sunlight, so several applications may be 
necessary to continue to control new pests as 
they arrive. You can prolong the period of 
effectiveness by applying sprays in the evening.
Commercial Products: BTK: Bactur, 
Bactospeine, Caterpillar Attack, Caterpillar 
Killer, Dipel, Javelin. Larvo-Bt, SOK-Bt,Thuri- 
cide. Worm Ender; BTI: Bactimos, Mosquito 
Attack, Teknar, Vectobac; BTSD: Colorado 
Potato Beetle Attack, M-One; Appetite stim­
ulants: Entice, Wheast
Milky Disease Spores
Bacillus popilliae and B. lentimorbus are
2 types of bacteria that are combined as a 
microbial insecticide product called milky dis­
ease or milky spore disease. The bacteria kill 
grubs of Japanese beetles and several related 
beetles but are harmless to other organisms. 
Beetle grubs eat spores that have been sprayed 
on lawns while feeding on grass roots. Infected 
grubs are filled with an opaque, milky white 
liquid full of bacterial spores, which will remain 
in the soil after the grubs die. Infected grubs 
inoculate the soil as they travel. Usually, only 
1 application is necessary since the disease 
is carried over from year to year by new gener­
ations of beetles. In northern climates, however, 
annual applications may be necessary.

BENEFICIAL MICROORGANISMS ■ 461
How to Use: Apply spores any time the 
ground is not frozen to control grub damage 
to your lawn. Treatment will not have much 
affect on populations of adult beetles unless it 
is applied on a community-wide basis, since 
adults are mobile and new ones will arrive 
daily from untreated areas.
Use 7-10 pounds of spore dust per acre 
or about 10 ounces per 2,500 square feet, 
applying the dust in spots roughly 4' apart. 
This is about 1 level teaspoon of powder per 
spot. You can make an old-fashioned applica­
tor from a 1-pound coffee can and a discarded 
broom handle. First, punch holes in the bot­
tom of the can with a 10-penny nail. Then bolt 
the can to the broom handle so that the bottom 
of the can is 4" from the bottom of the handle.
Fill the can % full with milky disease 
spores. To apply the dust, sharply tap the end 
of the stick against the lawn. One rap will re­
lease the right amount of powder for each treat­
ment spot. Try to apply the dust just before a 
rain, or water the area lightly after application.
You can apply granular formulations with 
a broadcast seeder or fertilizer spreader. Use 
about 4 pounds per 2,500 square feet, and 
water immediately after applying.
Commercial 
Products: Doom, Japa- 
demic
Fungi
Beauveria bassiana has long been recog­
nized as a biological control of many insect 
pests that spend part of their lives in the soil, 
particularly Colorado potato beetles. This fun­
gal pathogen of insects exists naturally in gar­
den soil, making a few insects sick each year. 
When environmental conditions are right and 
susceptible insect populations are high, out­
breaks of this and other insect pathogens occur 
that can cause pest populations to crash almost 
overnight. Unfortunately, the concentrated pest 
population damages many plants before being 
controlled.
A commercial product containing B. bas- 
siana is available as an insecticide in the Soviet 
Union and China. Scientists in the United 
States are currently studying the fungus. A 
commercial version may be available in the 
United States in the near future. Meanwhile, 
to encourage native populations, refrain from 
using fungicides in the garden.
Many other specific fungal pathogens of 
insect pests are being studied and developed 
for their potential use as biological control 
agents. Coelomomyces, Lagenidium, Ento- 
mophthora. and Culicinomyces are fungal 
pathogens that infect whiteflies and mosqui­
toes and show promise for future development.
Viruses
Like the human cold virus, insect viruses 
tend to thrive when their hosts are under stress. 
They occur naturally but don’t severely impact 
pest populations except under stressful condi­
tions, such as high numbers of pests with a 
limited food supply. They're specific to insects 
and mites and are safe for other organisms 
and the environment.
Nuclear polyhedrosis viruses (NPV) and 
granulosis viruses (GV) have received the most 
attention. Both of these belong to a general 
group of viral diseases known as baculoviruscs. 
Both of these types of viruses form a capsule 
that protects them in the environment until 
they are eaten by an insect. Afterward, the 
capsule dissolves in the insect's gut, releasing 
the particles, which spread to other organs. 
When the insect dies, its body is full of a liquid 
containing millions of virus capsules. Infected 
caterpillars are discolored and have a soggy, 
limp appearance. When disturbed, the body 
breaks open releasing more capsules to infect 
other insects.
NPV strains control armyworms, cab­
bage loopers, cotton bollworms, gypsy moths, 
soybean loopers, tobacco budworms, and vel- 
vetbean caterpillars. GV controls cabbage

462 ■ BIOLOGICAL CONTROLS
butterflies, codling moths, oriental fruit moths, 
and potato tuberworms.
While there are currently no viral prod­
ucts available for home use, several are in the 
experimental stages. Some are in use for for­
est and field crop applications.
Protozoans
Protozoans are tiny, single-celled organ­
isms that may have complex life cycles. Nosema 
locustae is a protozoan pathogen that infects 
the fat tissue of most grasshopper and cricket 
species. Once ingested, spores germinate in 
the insect's gut. The pest becomes sluggish 
and slowly dies or remains sufficiently ill that 
it no longer reproduces or causes damage. 
Grasshoppers that survive lay infected eggs 
that serve as inoculum during the following 
season. Nosema is recommended for long­
term control, since mortality may take as long 
as 4-6 weeks, although some species die within 
a few hours. Once applied, each successive 
generation is reinfected by the preceding one. 
Nosema is an effective grasshopper control in 
large fields. It is not effective for backyard 
use, because grasshoppers are highly mobile 
and new adults will continue to migrate in. To 
be effective, community-wide applications arc 
necessary.
How to Use: Apply Nosema products to 
control grasshoppers when the late nymphs 
are emerging. In areas with severe community- 
wide grasshopper problems. Cooperative Ex­
tension personnel can help you time the 
application. In your yard, broadcast the bait 
on lawns and garden beds in early summer 
when you see immature grasshoppers (less 
than 
long).
Commercial 
Products: Grasshopper 
Attack, Grasshopper Control, Nolo Bait, 
Semaspore
Antagonistic Organisms
Microbial antagonists are pathogens that 
don't directly attack pest organisms. Instead, 
they secrete antibiotics that are toxic to other 
microbial oi^anisms. They also compete aggres­
sively with disease-causing pathogens for food, 
often winning the race without harming the 
host plant. This special group of microbials 
occurs naturally in the soil. Scientists are only 
recently learning how to manipulate them to 
control plant diseases.
Agrobacterium radiobacter is a fungal 
antagonist of crown gall diseases that affect 
fruit and nut trees. Gliocladium virens is a 
fungal organism approved for greenhouse con­
trol of the pathogens that cause damping-off 
iRhizoctonia solani and Pythium ultimum). 
Trichoderma species fungi show promise in 
controlling damping-off diseases of seedlings.
How to Use: Binab-T, a mixture of several 
species of the beneficial fungus Trichoderma, 
is currently registered for use on fresh tree 
wounds. Used before sealing, it establishes 
residence at the site and prevents other patho­
genic organisms from moving in. Galltrol-A 
and Norbac 84-C are commercial sources of 
Agrobacterium radiobacter. Mix these prod­
ucts according to label directions, and use as 
a disinfectant dressing for pruning cuts or as a 
dip for bare-root plants. Look for antagonistic 
microbials in garden supply catalogs that fea­
ture least-toxic pest controls.
Commercial Products: Binab-T, Galltrol- 
A, Norbac 84-C
iai

ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
I n  isolated instances, even a combination of 
cultural, physical, and biological controls wont 
be enough to remedy a pest problem. In these 
cases, you'll face the choice of losing your 
harvest or valuable plant or resorting to organ­
ically acceptable sprays and dusts.
Not all natural sprays and dusts are true 
insecticides or fungicides like pyrethrin or 
sulfur. Pest-plagued gardeners have long re­
sorted to homemade sprays with ingredients 
such as hot peppers, garlic, and strongly fla­
vored herbs. The general idea is to make a 
pungent potion that will fool pests into turn­
ing away from their favorite plants. Some, 
such as hot pepper and garlic sprays, deter 
insect feeding and possibly confuse the pests’ 
sm ell rec e p to rs (often lo cated  o n  th e ir feet).
Organically acceptable sprays such as hor­
ticultural oils make pest habitats inhospita­
ble; they also coat and suffocate scales. Soap 
sprays kill soft-bodied pests, as well as many 
beneficials, but are safer for the gardener than 
botanical pesticides such as pyrethrin. Gentle, 
nonpesticidal controls such as homemade 
herbal or baking soda sprays are much less 
toxic than botanical pesticides; select them 
first when you seek sprays or dusts to remedy 
pest problems.
Handle with Care
Use organically acceptable sprays and 
dusts with restraint. Some, especially botani­
cal insecticides, present the same risks to the 
dynamic living community in your garden as 
do synthetic poisons. Use them too freely, and 
you may face the problem known as pest 
resurgence. In other words, you kill off some 
pests and most of their predators, and the
pests come back stronger than ever with no 
predators to slow them down. And, although 
organically acceptable botanicals like pyre­
thrin break down quickly after application, 
they are highly toxic initially. During the first 
few hours after they are applied, these and 
other naturally derived chemicals can kill large 
numbers of honeybees, spiders, and other ben­
eficial organisms.
Spray Safely
Proper application of pesticides and fun­
gicides is time consuming, but necessary. A 
lackadaisical approach at the treatment stage 
throws away the time you've spent caring for 
your garden, identifying pests, and selecting 
appropriate controls. It also endangers you. 
the environment, and the plants you wish to 
protect.
A few of the organic products covered in 
this section are available as dusts or pre­
mixed sprays, but many others are liquid con­
centrates or wettable powders. The following 
guidelines will help you apply controls safely 
and correctly; in addition, always follow label 
instructions.
1. Wait for calm weather. Applying any 
pesticide under windy conditions causes the 
poison to blow or drift where it is not wanted 
and greatly increases the risk that you'll inhale 
it or get it in your eyes.
2. Pick ripe fruits or vegetables, prune 
plants if appropriate, and remove weeds that 
provide pests cover. Although fruits and vege­
tables are safe to eat within a few days after 
application of most botanical pesticides, it 
makes sense to gather up everything that's 
ready to eat before you spray. This also reduces
463

464 ■ ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
your need to enter recently treated areas while 
pesticides are actively working.
3. Dress properly. Wear long pants, shoes 
and socks, and a long-sleeved shirt. If you are 
applying a liquid pesticide, do not wear leather 
shoes, which readily absorb spillage. Wear a 
face mask, such as a disposable dust mask. How­
ever, if the product label advises you not to 
inhale the spray vapor or mist (you'll see this 
warning on some botanical pesticide products), 
wear a respirator. It’s a good idea to wear 
goggles as well, because the tissues of the eye 
can absorb pesticides fast and easily. Wear 
rubber gloves when handling any pesticide.
4. Precheck your equipment. Make sure 
spray nozzles are open and pump mechanisms 
are working properly before you load the res­
ervoir with a pesticide. Otherwise, you can 
end up with a serious disposal problem.
5. Mix up only as much as you will need. 
Work slowly and carefully so you don’t spill 
pesticides during the mixing process.
6. Apply the pesticide when beneficials 
are relatively inactive. You may need to observe 
insect activity patterns for a few days to dis­
cover the best time. Generally, mid-morning 
should be avoided, as this is prime time for 
honeybees and many winged beneficial insects. 
If you're only going to treat a few plants, put a 
row cover over them for a day or two after the 
pesticide is applied to keep beneficials out of 
the treated area.
7. Spray and dust early in the morning 
or in the evening. Many pesticides, such as 
horticultural oils and insecticidal soaps, can 
injure plants when they are applied during the 
hottest and brightest part of the day. Others, 
like pyrethrin, lose their toxicity when ex­
posed to high temperatures. Most botanicals 
begin to break down immediately when ex­
posed to light; to get the best control, don’t 
apply these in hot sun.
8. Make a thorough application. Treat
upper and lower leaf surfaces as well as places 
in mulch where pests might run and hide.
9. The best way to dispose of any pesti­
cide is to apply it properly, but if you do have 
any leftover solution, dilute it with water and 
place in a bucket or other container. Rinse 
out equipment and allow the rinse water to 
drip into the bucket. Place the bucket of con­
taminated water in sunlight for a day or two to 
let the pesticide degrade. Make sure it's inac­
cessible to children, pets, and wildlife while 
it sits—cover it with a screen if it’s in an out­
door spot where animals might find it and 
drink from it. After it has degraded, dump the 
solution away from all water sources, includ­
ing ponds.
10. Change your clothes and wash your 
hands and face. If you spilled some solution 
on yourself, take a shower.
11. Return the container to storage, which 
should be a cool, dark place out of the reach 
of children. Always store pesticides in their 
original containers. Most botanical dusts are 
mixed with diatomaceous earth or a fine clay 
powder and are easily confused with plain 
diatomaceous earth. Liquid concentrates also 
should stay in their original containers— never 
store concentrates or solutions in beverage 
containers.
12. Apply botanicals and other organi­
cally acceptable pesticides only to the plants 
specified on the label and at the recommended 
rates.
Organic Control Products
Organically acceptable pesticides have 
three characteristics that distinguish them 
from their synthetic counterparts: They are 
derived from natural substances, they are gen­
erally less toxic to humans than synthetic 
pesticides, and they break down relatively 
quickly in the environment to harmless sub-

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS ■ 465
The Way to Spray
F
inding the right dust or sproy 1 or pest* 
ridden plants is only the first step in pest 
control. The next step is actually applying the 
substance exactly where it's needed. For best 
results, choose an application method suited 
to the substance you are applying ond to the 
size of the job. Here are some practical 
guidelines.
■ For small jobs, use a hand-held trig­
ger sprayer. Keep one sprayer for nonpoison- 
ous liquid sprays, like those made from soap, 
garlic, peppers, or kelp, and label a separate 
sprayer for biological or botanical pesticides 
Remember to wear rubber gloves while apply­
ing biological or botanical controls.
■ For larger spray jobs, select a pres­
sure sprayer that you can pressurize man- 
uolly through pumping. Choose a sprayer large 
enough to handle the area you want to cover 
without frequent refilling. The more times you 
must refill the spray reservoir, the more often 
ycu will be exposed to the spray. Carefully 
clean and dry the nozzle and any filters after
each use. For complete information on clean­
ing your sprayer and disposing of unused 
pesticides, see "Sproy Safely” on page 463.
■ When spreading nonpoisonous dust, 
such as diatomaceous earth, punch small 
holes in the sides ond bottom of a paper bag, 
place a cup of the dust inside, and shake it 
over the areas you want to treat. Or place the 
dust in an old sock, tie the end closed, and 
beat the sock above the plants with o stick or 
broom handle. Use caution, and wear protec­
tive gear to avoid inhaling dusts.
■ With biological or botanical pesticide 
dusts, such as BTK or pyrethrin, use a duster 
designed for this purpose. Besides keeping 
the dust away from your face, dusting appli­
ances push out puffs of air along with the 
pesticide, resulting in much better coverage. 
Pesticide dusts sprinkled onto plants are much 
less effective than those applied so that they 
temporarily form a cloud around affected plant 
leaves.
stances. However, there is no easy way to group 
organic controls. Some are truly insecticidal 
or fungicidal, while others work by deterring 
pests. Some substances kill both insects and 
disease organisms.
Many organically acceptable controls are 
known by more than one name. For example, 
highly refined horticultural oils used to kill a 
variety of pests are also called supreme, sum­
mer, or superior oils. And some gardeners 
refer to spraying pyrethrin, while others call 
that botanical pesticide pyrethrum.
This listing of organically acceptable con­
trols is in alphabetical order. If you have trou­
ble finding a control measure that you are 
interested in, look it up in the index for a 
quick reference to the appropriate listing.
Alcohol
Sprays of 70 percent isopropyl alcohol 
(also known as rubbing alcohol) control a 
variety of pests on garden plants. Alcohol also 
works well against pests on houseplants that 
have waxy foliage.
Protection Offered: Alcohol sprays can 
control aphids, flea beetles, scales, thrips, and 
whiteflies.
Precautions: Undiluted alcohol and solu­

466 
■ 
ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
tions of water and alcohol may injure foliage. 
Test sprays on a few leaves before applying to 
an entire plant. It may take several days for 
damage symptoms to appear.
How to Use: Spot treat scale infesta­
tions by wiping them from your plants with a 
cotton ball soaked in 70 percent isopropyl 
alcohol. To make a whole-plant spray, dilute
1-2 cups of isopropyl alcohol with I quart 
water. Test this solution on a small area before 
spraying to be sure the plants will not be 
damaged.
All-Purpose Insect Pest Spray
Since its first issue, editors of Organic 
Gardening magazine have collected the pest- 
control remedies and recipes mailed in by 
readers from around the world. Several ideas 
were repeatedly offered as safe, effective insect 
controls. The editors combined several of these 
home remedies to make an all-purpose spray 
out of ingredients found in most kitchens. 
This spray combines the repellent effects of 
garlic, onion, and hot pepper with the insecti­
cidal and surfactant properties of soap.
Protection Offered: Try this spray against 
any leaf-eating pests in the garden, and make 
a note of what pests are successfully controlled.
Precautions: When spraying, be careful 
to keep the mixture well away from your eyes 
and nose and wear rubber gloves, since it 
could cause painful burning.
How to Use: Chop, grind, or liquefy 1 
garlic bulb and 1 small onion. Add 1 tea­
spoon of powdered cayenne pepper and mix 
with 1 quart of water. Steep 1 hour, strain 
through cheesecloth, then add 1 tablespoon 
of liquid dish soap to the strained liquid; 
mix well.
Spray your plants thoroughly, being sure 
to cover the undersides of leaves. Store the 
mixture for up to 1 week in a labeled, cov­
ered container in the refrigerator.
Ammonia
Household ammonia is a common clean­
ing product that also provides control for sev­
eral common plant pests.
Protection Offered: Ammonia can con­
trol aphids, flea beetles, scales, thrips, and 
whiteflies.
Precautions: Ammonia solutions may 
injure the leaves of some plants. Do not apply 
in hot weather or on drought-stressed plants.
How to Use: Mix 1 part ammonia with 7 
parts water and apply as a spray, after you've 
tested a few leaves to be sure the plants will 
not be damaged.
Avermectins
Streptomyces bacteria are familiar to us 
as important sources of antibiotics used in 
medicine. Avermectins, including abamectins 
and ivermectins, are naturally occurring anti­
biotics that have insecticidal properties that 
are useful in the garden as well as on pets and 
livestock.
Protection Offered: Avermectins are reg­
istered to control spider mites and leafminers 
on flowers and ornamental foliage crops. They 
are also available as a fire ant bait, but other 
garden uses await federal approval.
Precautions: Avermectins have been 
found to be extremely toxic to mammals, 
aquatic invertebrates, fish, bees, and other 
beneficial insects. They also produce devel­
opmental toxicity in mice. Soil microorga­
nisms readily degrade avermectins; studies 
indicate they are unlikely to leach through 
most soils.
How to Use: You can buy avermectins 
in spray form to control leafminers and spider 
mites. Spray both upper and lower surfaces of 
leaves thoroughly to ensure good coverage. 
To control fire ants, broadcast the poison bait 
or apply it to individual ant mounds, accord­
ing to label instructions. Placing the bait in

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS ■ 
467
the shade prolongs its effectiveness.
Commercial Products: Avid. Fire Ant 
Ender (formerly Affirm)
Baking Soda
Baking soda, or sodium bicarbonate, has 
fungicidal properties when used as a spray on 
garden plants. It is an effective protectant as 
well as an eradicant that will kill some organ­
isms that have already infected your plants.
Protection Offered: Research has shown 
that a 0.5 percent solution of baking soda will 
help prevent roses from being damaged by 
black spot. It may also control other fungal 
diseases, such as powdery mildew.
How to use: Make a baking soda spray 
by dissolving 1 teaspoon of baking soda in 1 
quart warm water. Add up to 1 teaspoon of 
liquid dish soap or insecticidal soap to make 
the solution cling to leaves for a longer period 
of time. Spray infected plants thoroughly, being 
sure to cover the undersides of leaves.
Bleach
Sodium and calcium hypochlorite, other­
wise known as bleach, is a common disinfec­
tant in the garden and greenhouse.
Protection Offered: Use bleach to disin­
fect greenhouse tools and benches and as a 
dip for cuttings taken from plants with disease 
symptoms. You can also use it to disinfect 
shovels, pruning shears, and seed-starting equip­
ment to prevent the spread of plant pathogens.
Precautions: In diluted form, bleach is 
relatively safe; undiluted, it is a toxic and 
caustic eye and skin irritant. It breaks down 
rapidly in the soil, but may drive soil pH into 
the alkaline range. It is not selective, so it kills 
the beneficial organisms along with the bad.
How to Use: In the greenhouse, dip plant 
cuttings, before rooting, in a 10 percent bleach 
solution (1 part bleach to 9 parts water). Pre­
vent damping-off disease in seedling flats by
drenching the soil after planting with a 2 per­
cent solution (2 */2 tablespoons bleach to 1 
gallon water). This drench has no residual 
effect; avoid contaminating flats once they 
have been treated (wash your hands and tools 
in a 10 percent bleach solution before touch­
ing the soil or plants in the flat). In the garden, 
disinfect tools such as shovels, trowels, and 
clippers with a 10 percent bleach solution 
between uses to avoid spreading diseases from 
plant to plant. After each treatment and at the 
end of the season, rinse all tools thoroughly 
and coat the metal parts with household oil. 
You can also disinfect plant cages, insect traps, 
and row cover with a bleach solution before 
storing them.
Bordeaux Mix
Bordeaux mix combines copper sulfate 
and hydrated lime into a wettable powder that 
may be dusted onto plants or mixed with water 
and applied as a spray.
Protection Offered: Bordeaux mix acts 
as a fungicide with insecticidal and insect 
repellent properties. Use it to control com­
mon plant diseases like anthracnose, bacte­
rial leaf spots and wilts, black spot, fire blight, 
peach leaf curl, powdery mildew, and rust.
Precautions: Bordeaux mix can burn 
plant foliage. One of the safer times to apply it 
is just before plants leaf out in the spring. 
Injury is most common at temperatures below 
50°F and when humidity is high. Read the 
product label carefully before applying bor- 
deaux mix.
How to use: You can buy bordeaux mix 
in powdered form, and apply it as a dust or 
mix it with water for spraying.
Boric Acid
Boric acid is a crystalline material that is 
derived from the mineral borax. It is effective 
as a stomach poison against several kinds of

468 
■ 
ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
insects, including ants and cockroaches.
Protection Offered: In the garden, boric 
acid is commonly used as a bait to control 
ants. Such baits typically combine boric acid 
dust and a food that attracts ants, such as 
sugar, jelly, or pet food.
Precautions: Boric acid can be toxic when 
ingested in high doses. Keep baits out of the 
reach of children and pets. Wear a dust mask, 
eye protection, and gloves when handling boric 
acid dust.
How to Use: Buy commercial baited 
traps, or make your own bait by mixing a few 
teaspoons of boric acid or borax with foods 
attractive to ants. Sugary or high-protein foods 
are usually most effective. Enclose the bait in 
a container with small holes to admit ants, 
and place in problem areas.
Commercial Products: Bait: Drax: Pow­
ders: Roach Prufe. Roach Kill
Botanical Pesticides
Farmers and homeowners used botanical 
pesticides to control both indoor and outdoor 
pests long before synthetic pesticides were 
formulated in the mid-1900s. Some of the ear­
liest insecticides were extracted from plants 
growing in tropical forests and other natural 
environments. These special plants are now 
grown commercially to produce botanical 
insecticides. Many of these products are use­
ful for controlling pests in organic gardens 
and in commercial production. You can expect 
to see expanded crop registrations for some 
botanical insecticides as well as the develop­
ment of new types of botanicals. as interest in 
environmentally sound pest control increases.
Some botanical insecticides are made by 
grinding raw plant materials, such as flowers, 
roots, stems, or seeds. Others are extracted 
from plant materials, then refined, purified, 
and packaged for sale.
Botanical pesticides have broad-spectrum 
activity, meaning that they kill a wide variety
of insects, including beneficials. Still, you will 
find that certain botanicals work better than 
others to control certain pests. Although they 
break down quickly in the environment, most 
botanicals are toxic to wildlife when first 
applied. They are also toxic to humans and 
their pets. Use these insecticides with caution 
and always follow label directions.
For information on specific botanical 
pesticides, see the following entries: "Citrus 
Oils" on page 470, "False Hellebore" on page 
472, "Neem" on page 477, “Nicotine" on page 
478, “Pyrethrin' on page 480. "Quassia” on 
page 481, "Rotenone" on page 481, “Ryania" 
on page 482, "Sabadilla” on page 482, and 
“Tomato-Leaf Spray” on page 485.
Bug Juice
Long ago, backyard gardeners discovered 
that some insect pests wouldn't feed on plants 
if dead members of their species were on 
those plants. In the 1960s. this observation 
caught on as a way to control pests, and gar­
deners began experimenting with solutions of 
pulverized pests as insecticidal sprays. Soon 
after, the Environmental Protection Agency 
warned that the bug juice sprays might con­
tain pathogens that could harm people, and 
they discouraged gardeners from using them.
The reasons why bug juice works to con­
trol pests are unknown, but there are several 
possible explanations. One is that some of the 
pests you collect and pulverize are infected 
with an insect disease. By making the bug 
juice, you're actually culturing the disease 
pathogen that will kill other pests when applied 
to infested plants. Like people, insects suffer 
from diseases that can spread quickly through 
the community.
Another explanation is that the odor of 
the crushed pests sprayed on the plants repels 
new arrivals. For example, the odor or alarm 
pheromones of dead beetles may discourage 
other beetles of the same species. Also, the

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS 
■ 
»69
The Other Ingredients
A
s if the words azadirachtin and diatoma­
ceous weren't tongue-twisting enough, 
you'll find even less familiar words in fhe fine 
print on pesticide labels. Here's an explana­
tion of some common label lingo.
Synergists
If you find fhe words piperonyl butoxide 
on a label, you've jusf discovered that your 
pesticide contains a synergist. Synergists 
enhance the effects of the pesticide's active 
ingredients, such as pyrethrin. The addition 
of a synergist reduces the amount of active 
ingredients needed to do the job, and since 
active ingredients tend to be expensive, syn­
ergists help keep the final product cost low. 
Seme synergists also help to deactivate pro­
tective enzymes that insects carry in their 
bodies; without the synergist, these enzymes 
often degrade a pesticide before it has a 
chance to work.
Piperonyl butoxide, also called PBO, is a 
common synergist used with botanical insec­
ticides such as pyrethrin and citrus oils. PBO 
is sufficiently toxic that it w as recently recog­
nized as a pesticide itself. When used fre­
quently at high concentrations, PBO may affect 
the human nervous system. For this reason, 
many organic certification programs prohibit 
the use of pesticides that contain PBO.
Inert Ingredients
On most labels you'll also find the words 
inert ingredients, a catchall term for additives 
that make pesticides easier to use. Inert 
ingredients do not enhance a product's toxicity. 
Rather, they are nonreactive substances that
help to keep a product stable in storage and 
act os "filler" material. If inert ingredients 
weren't added to pesticides, it would be almost 
impossible to measure the small amount of 
active ingredient actually required, ond even 
more difficult to achieve the proper coverage.
Inert ingredients in liquid pesticides 
include water, alcohol, and other solvents. 
Pesticide powders and dusts often contain 
added diatomaceous earth, powdered seeds, 
or talc for added bulk, or fuller's earth to help 
prevent caking. Other inert ingredients, known 
as surfactants, help powders mix easily with 
water or help sprays adhere to foliage so that 
pests are more likely to contact it. In the 
absence of surfactants, many pesticide sprays 
would simply roll off waxy leaf surfaces Soap 
is one of the most common surfactants added 
to pesticide sprays
Some pesticides, like sulfur or boric acid, 
are packaged in their pure form without inert 
ingredients. Other pesticides combine an active 
ingredient, such as pyrethnn, with an active 
diluting agent, such as insecticidal soap, which 
also acts as a synergist. Most pesticides, 
however, are a single toxic ingredient mixed 
with one or several inert ingredients
To figure out just how much octive 
ingredient you are buying, read the product 
label for the total percentage of inert ingre­
dients For example, a typical insecticidal soap 
in a ready-to-use formula contains about 98 
percent inert ingredients. Insecticidal soap in 
concentrated form contains a lower percent­
age of inert ingredients since you will be 
adding your own inert ingredient- water-prior 
to using the product.

470 
■ 
ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
odors may attract the natural enemies of 
the pests.
Protection Offered: Gardeners report that 
bug juice will control cabbage loopers and 
Colorado potato beetle and Mexican bean 
beetle larvae. Larger pests are easier to col­
lect than small, fast-moving types.
Precautions: There hasn't been much 
research conducted on bug juice. Since you're 
dealing with the unknown, wear a filter mask, 
long-sleeved shirt, rubber gloves, and long pants 
when mixing and spraying the juice to avoid 
skin contact. Don't use a kitchen blender to 
prepare the spray —you could contaminate 
your food with pathogens that may sicken you 
as well as the pests. Wash sprayed produce 
thoroughly before eating it.
How to Use: Collect about V2 cup of the 
pests, especially ones that appear to be slug­
gish or sick. Put the insects in an old blender 
with about 2 cups of water and liquefy. Strain 
the mix, then dilute V4 cup of this concentrate 
with 1-2 cups of water in a sprayer. You can 
store leftover mix in the freezer, but be sure to 
label it.
Use the spray to control the same pest 
species that is in the mixture. Spray the plants 
thoroughly on both sides of leaves. You can 
reapply once or twice a week, although some 
bug juice sprays are reported to be effective 
for as long as 2 months.
Chitin
Chitin is a protein complex found in shell­
fish shells. When shells of lobsters, crabs, 
shrimp, and other shellfish are added to the 
soil, the chitin stimulates population growth 
of beneficial soil microorganisms. These micro­
organisms produce the enzyme chitinase, which 
destroys nematode eggs and larvae. As chitin 
breaks down, nitrogen and potassium become 
available to plants.
Protection Offered: You can use chitin 
on all ornamentals, fruits, nuts, vegetables.
trees, lawns, and row crops to control nema­
todes.
Precautions: Adding chitin alone will not 
be effective, because the microorganisms need 
extra nitrogen to support their increased 
populations. If you add a chitin source such as 
shellfish shells, also add dried blood or some 
other organic nitrogen source to the soil. The 
only commercially available chitin source, 
ClandoSan, contains urea formaldehyde (a syn­
thetic nitrogen fertilizer) as its nitrogen source 
and is prohibited under some organic certifi­
cation programs.
How to Use: To control nematode pests 
on lawns and under trees, apply crushed shells 
at a rate of 5 pounds per 200 square feet, then 
water them in. Be sure to include a source of 
nitrogen. In vegetable gardens, till chitin into 
the soil at the same rate. Or, apply it in bands 
along the row at one-half the rate. Chitin breaks 
down slowly and provides nematode control 
for 1 year with a single application.
Commercial Products: ClandoSan
Citrus Oils
Citrus peels contain oils with insecticidal 
properties. The botanical insecticide-containing 
citrus oil has the potential to control many 
garden and home pests and has an orangy 
fragrance. Linalool and d-limonene are the 
active ingredients extracted from citrus waste. 
Linalool is an insect nerve poison that kills 
pests on contact: the mode of action of 
d-limonene remains unknown. Look for these 
extracts among the list of active ingredients in 
new pesticide products that claim to have a 
citrus base.
Precautions: Although generally not 
harmful to humans, exposure to citrus oils may 
cause some animals to experience tremors 
and salivation.
Protection Offered: One manufacturer 
has combined citrus extracts with insecticidal 
soap for effective aphid and mite control. Cit­

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS ■ 
471
rus extracts are also toxic to leaf-eating cater­
pillars, Colorado potato beetles, fire ants, flies, 
and wasps, although they aren't yet registered 
for those uses. Expect to see more garden 
pesticides made from citrus oils as new prod­
ucts are developed and registered.
How to Use: To control aphids and mites 
in the garden, prepare the spray solution ac­
cording to label directions. Cover the leaves 
thoroughly, making sure to coat the under­
sides where many pests hide. As plants grow 
and rain washes away the oils, you may need 
to spray at 1-2 week intervals to maintain the 
protection.
Commercial Products: Aphid-Mite At­
tack (combines insecticidal soap and citrus 
oils)
Compost Tea
A solution made by soaking finished com­
post in water not only provides important nutri­
ents to plants, it also serves as a natural 
fungicide. See "Composting for Insect and 
Disease Control*’ on page 425 for details on 
how to make compost tea and use it as a 
fungicide.
Copper
Copper has been used as a pesticide since 
the 1700s. Copper sulfate has herbicidal and 
fungicidal properties: It inactivates critical 
enzyme systems in fungi, algae, and other 
plants.
Protection Offered: Copper is a broad- 
spectrum protectant fungicide used to pro­
tect vegetables, ornamentals, fruits, and nuts 
from plant pathogens. Use it in the garden to 
control anthracnose, bacterial leaf spot, black 
rot, blights, downy mildew, peach leaf curl, 
and Septoria leaf spot.
Precautions: Copper products are toxic 
to humans and other mammals; they also irri­
tate the eyes and skin, so use adequate protec­
tion when you use these products. Copper is
highly toxic to fish and aquatic invertebrates. 
Its toxicity is reduced when mixed with lime 
(this product is called bordeaux mix), but 
repeated applications of any copper product 
will stunt a plant. Although copper does not 
become concentrated in plant tissues, it per­
sists indefinitely in the soil.
How to Use: You can buy fixed copper 
as a dust or sprayable solution from organic 
garden suppliers. Copper sulfate, also called 
bluestone, is available as a dust, wettable 
powder, or liquid concentrate. Since copper is 
a protectant, cover the entire plant surface to 
prevent invasion by disease organisms. Spray 
in the early morning in dry. bright weather so 
that plants have time to dry. If the solution 
remains on leaves too long, it may penetrate 
the cuticle and kill the tissue. Copper may be 
applied up to 1 day before harvest.
Commercial Products: Bonide Liquid 
Copper. Kocide, Top Cop, Top Cop with 
Sulfur
Diatomaceous Earth
Diatomaceous earth (DE) is a nonselec- 
tive, abrasive dust commonly used to kill pests 
in the home and the garden. It is unique among 
the insecticidal dusts, since it works by physi­
cal action rather than by poisoning. DE is the 
fossilized silica shells of algae called diatoms; 
the microscopic shells are covered with sharp 
needlelike projections that penetrate an insect's 
cuticle, allowing vital liquids to leak out. DE 
also absorbs the waxy coatings on insects 
bodies; both actio n s cau se pests to  die of 
dehydration.
Protection Offered: Dust plants and soil 
with DE to control crawling pests like slugs 
and snails. On plant foliage, DE will kill soft- 
bodied pests like aphids, caterpillars, leaf­
hoppers. and thrips: hairy-bodied pests may 
be somewhat resistant. It is an excellent prod­
uct for use in stored grain and seeds, and for 
indoor flea and louse control. Farmers often

472 
■ 
ORGANIC SPRAYS AND OUSTS
add DE to animal feed to control internal 
parasites of livestock.
Precautions: DE is considered nontoxic 
to mammals, but the same properties that 
make it lethal to pests also cause it to irritate 
mucous membranes. Wear a dust mask when 
applying DE to avoid inhaling the particles. 
Don’t apply the dust where children are likely 
to encounter it. Don’t confuse pool-grade DE 
with the garden variety; the type used in pools 
is chemically treated and poses a severe respi­
ratory hazard. DE is nonselective and will kill 
beneficial insects. Rain will dilute or wash 
away DE and mix it into the soil, but the DE 
will retain its insecticidal properties.
How to Use: Purchase natural-grade DE 
as a dust and apply only in problem areas to 
minimize harm to beneficials. When applied 
around the base of susceptible seedlings like 
cabbage, onions, and other transplants, DE
helps control root maggots and other soil- 
dwelling pests. Dust foliage to control chew­
ing pests, but avoid dusting flowers. For 
stubborn thrips infestations, dust only the under­
sides of affected leaves and in a circular band 
on the soil beneath each plant. Apply DE 
when plants are wet from dew or after over­
head watering, to help keep the dust on the 
plants. Mix diatomaceous earth with liquid 
dish soap and water to make a thick slurry; 
paint on tree trunks to protect them. DE is 
also available mixed with pyrethrin.
Commercial Products: Perma-Guard
False Hellebore
Several species of false hellebore (Vera- 
trum spp.) contain highly poisonous alkaloids 
with insecticidal properties. Harvested and 
dried, the powdered roots of these lilylike 
plants yield an insecticide that poisons chew­
ing insects.
Protection Offered: False hellebore con­
trols garden insects with chewing mouthparts
such as beetles, caterpillars, European corn 
borers, grasshoppers, and sawflies. It has also 
been used to control flies, imported currant- 
worms, and mosquitoes.
Precautions: Once prepared, false hel­
lebore loses its effectiveness quickly when 
exposed to air and sunlight. Store it in a cool, 
dry place to retain its potency. False hellebore 
was once used to make poison arrows—keep 
this in mind and use extreme caution when 
working with hellebore; it is highly toxic if 
ingested.
How to Use: You can grow your own 
false hellebore and collect the roots for drying 
and grinding into powder, but be aware of its 
toxicity. To make a spray for controlling insect 
pests on garden plants, mix 1 ounce with 2 
gallons of water. Or, mix the powder with 
flour or hydrated lime to make an insecticidal 
dust. Since it loses effectiveness quickly, re­
peated applications may be necessary.
Fungicides
The 2 most commonly used organically 
acceptable fungicides are sulfur and copper. 
(Synthetic fungicides also contain sulfur and 
copper, but they are chemically combined with 
other elements such as carbon.) Even in their 
pure and simple form, they are deadly poisons 
that should be used with discretion. These 
and other fungicides act as protectants that 
inhibit the germination and growth of fungal 
spores; unfortunately, they won’t stop the 
spread of plant disease once infection has 
occurred, so it is important to apply them 
prior to periods of wet and humid weather, 
when disease organisms can spread and grow 
easily. Follow label directions for frequency of 
application; spray or dust only when the threat 
of disease is great.
For specific fungicidal product informa­
tion, see the following entries: “Baking Soda” 
on page 467, “Bordeaux Mix” on page 467,

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS ■ 
473
“Compost Tea” on page 471, "Garlic Oil” be­
low. and "Soap Sprays” on page 483.
Garlic Oil
Herbal folklore recommends garlic for 
its antibiotic, antifungal, and insecticidal 
properties. When combined with mineral oil 
and pure soap, it becomes an effective insecti­
cide with fungicidal properties as well.
Protection Offered: Garlic oil kills insects, 
but not selectively. Use it to control aphids, 
imported cabbageworms, leafhoppers. larval 
mosquitoes, squash bugs, and whiteflies. It 
also works against some fungi and some ne­
matodes. Some gardeners report that it has 
little effect against Colorado potato beetles, 
grapeleaf skeletonizers. grasshoppers, red ants, 
or sowbugs. Adult lady beetles seem unharmed 
by garlic oil sprays.
Precautions: Since garlic is consumed 
daily in some cultures with no ill affects, we 
assume it is a safe product to use in the garden 
and that excessive precautions are unnecessary. 
Some foliar injury may occur when garlic sprays 
include oil and/or soap. Since it is nonselective, 
garlic spray can kill beneficials as well as pests.
How to Use: Soak 3 ounces of finely 
minced garlic cloves in 2 teaspoons of mineral 
oil for at least 24 hours. Add I pint of water 
that has 1/a ounce of liquid dish soap mixed 
into it. Stir well and strain into a glass jar for 
storage. Combine 1-2 tablespoons of this con­
centrate with 1 pint of water to make a spray. 
Test your mixture on a few leaves to check for 
injury caused by the oil and soap; damage 
may not appear for 2-3 days. Spray plants 
thoroughly to ensure good coverage.
Growth Regulators
Insect growth and reproduction is con­
trolled by hormones that must be present in 
the right place at the right time and at the 
right concentration. Most insects shed their 
external skeletons periodically as they grow
and develop. Juvenile hormone (JH) is one of 
the chemicals that help to regulate this process. 
However, if insects are exposed to JH at the 
wrong time, they do not mature. Scientists 
have used this and similar concepts to develop 
insecticides that control several important insect 
pests. Most available products are synthetic 
versions of naturally occurring insect growth- 
regulating hormones.
Protection Offered: M ethoprene is a 
growth regulator that prevents the immature 
blackflies, fire ants, fleas, fungus gnats, 
mosquitoes, and some midges and cattle flies 
from maturing. You can expect to see com­
mercial products released containing growth 
regulators that control codling moth eggs and 
larvae, Colorado potato beetle larvae, army­
worms, and whitefly larvae.
Precautions: Since humans do not have 
the same chemical processes as insects, insect 
growth regulators are considered among the 
safest of pest-control products. They don't 
irritate the skin or eyes, and since the growth- 
regulating hormones must be eaten by the 
pests to be effective, they are not as likely to 
affect beneficial and nontarget insects.
How to Use: To control greenhouse fun­
gus gnats with methoprene products, follow 
label instructions and spray thoroughly to get 
good coverage on all leaf surfaces. The mos­
quito control Altosid is available as a slow- 
release liquid and in briquette form floating in 
wet areas where mosquitoes are likely to breed.
Commercial Products: Altosid (metho­
prene), Enstar (kinoprene, for whitefly control), 
Precor (for flea and gnat control)
Herbal Sprays
Many of the aromatic herbs are well-known 
for their hardiness and for the lack of atten­
tion that insect pests pay them. Several scien­
tific studies confirm the repellent effect of 
herbal extract sprays, long relied upon by 
organic gardeners.

474 
■ 
ORC.AMC SPRAYS AND Dl'STS
People and Pet Protectors
W
hile tending your garden, you may find 
that fhe pests that most plague you are 
not on your plants but on you or your pet. In 
addition to protecting your garden from pests, 
some of the control methods in this book 
offer safe alternatives to dousing yourself or 
Fido with synthetic chemicals.
Once you've exhausted (or been ex­
hausted by) physical controls such as swat­
ting. handpicking, and using barriers-long 
pants, mosquito netting, and so on-you may 
find a solution omong the biological and bo­
tanical controls listed below.
■ Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis 
(BTI). This variety of BT provides safe, effec­
tive control of mosquito larvae in water, reduc­
ing the population of irritating, disease-carrying 
adults.
■ Avermectins. These naturally occur­
ring antibiotics produced by the bacterium 
Streptomyces avermitilis play an important 
role in modern agriculture. The group of 
avermectins known as ivermectins are used 
to control parasitic worms and stable and 
horn flies in livestock.
Pet owners use avermectins to control 
heartworms and other internal parasites in 
dogs. Avermectins are toxic to collies; consult 
your veterinarian before treating your dog 
with avermectins.
■ Growth regulators. A variety of prod­
ucts that interfere with pests' ability to molt
and mature may become the first line of defense 
against annoying, hard-to-control pests such 
as mosquitoes and fleas. Methoprene, sold as 
Altosid for mosquito control, is available as a 
slow-release liquid and in briquette form for 
floating in wet areas where mosquitoes are 
likely to breed. Precor, another methoprene 
product, prevents larval fleas and gnats from 
maturing.
■ 
Citrus oils. A pleasant-smelling alter­
native to synthetic insect repellents, citrus 
oils repel and kill fleas on dogs and cats and 
in their bedding; look for products with the 
active ingredients linalool and d-limonene. 
Products containing citrus oils are also avail­
able to repel flies, mosquitoes, and other 
pests of humans. In general, citrus oils are 
safe for humans, pets, and other mammals. 
However, exposure to citrus oils may cause 
some animals to experience tremors and 
salivation. Test your pets for sensitivity by 
treating a small area of skin before bathing or 
dipping them. As with any pesticide, an 
overopplication can poison your pet.
There are many other home remedies 
for controlling the pests that plague you and 
your pets. Commercial products make use of 
botanicals such as citronella ond cedar chips, 
to name a few; a broad spectrum of herbal 
concoctions are also effective and worthy of 
further investigation.
Protection Offered: The essential oils of 
sage and thyme and the alcohol extracts of 
such herbs as hyssop, rosemary, sage, thyme, 
and white clover can be used to reduce the 
number of pest eggs laid and the amount of feed­
ing damage caused by a broad range of pests. 
Sprays made from tansy repel imported cab­
bageworms on cabbage, reducing the number 
of eggs laid on the plants. Teas made from 
wormwood or nasturtiums may repel aphids 
from fruit trees. Some gardeners have used 
extracts of catnip, chives, feverfew, marigolds, 
or rue against leaf-feeding pests. Experiment 
with vour own herbal extracts to control leaf-

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS ■ 
475
eating pests in the garden.
Precautions: The medicinal properties 
of many herbs are well-known; make sure you 
don’t give yourself an overdose when applying 
herbal sprays. Follow the same precautions as 
for other pesticides: Wear a mask and protec­
tive clothing to avoid inhaling the spray or 
getting it on your skin.
How to Use: You can buy essential herbal 
oils and dilute them with water to make sprays. 
Experiment with proportions, starting with a 
few drops of oil per cup of water.
Make your own herbal extracts by mash­
ing or blending 1-2 cups of fresh leaves with
2-4 cups of water and leaving them to soak 
overnight. You can also make concentrated 
herbal teas by pouring the same amount of 
boiling water over 2-4 cups fresh or 1-2 cups 
dry leaves and leaving them to steep until 
cool. Strain the mixture through cheesecloth 
and dilute the resulting liquid with 2-4 cups of 
water to make a spray. Add a few drops of 
liquid soap to help the spray stick to leaves.
You can also make alcohol extracts of 
pest-repelling herbs. Follow the directions in 
the Pyrethrin entry on page 480 for this 
procedure.
Homemade Sprays
In the past, a lack of organically accept­
able commercial pesticides forced organic gar­
deners to use innovation and creativity in solving 
their pest problems. The result is an array of 
homemade pesticides that you can prepare at 
home. Follow the precautions included with 
the recipes throughout this controls encyclo­
pedia, since even the safest ingredients can be 
used in the wrong way. Some of the remedies 
are used for controlling both insects and 
diseases.
Unlike commercial pesticides, the home­
made versions tend to be simple and unrefined, 
with a lot of room for experimenting. Yet 
many work just as well as commercial products.
You may find that some concentrations work 
better than others; note your observations for 
future reference. You may also discover that 
some of the mixtures have the potential to 
injure your plants, so be sure to test your 
concoctions on a few leaves before making a 
garden-wide application. Any damage should 
be apparent within a few days.
If you’d like to try one of these controls, 
you’ll find recipes for homemade sprays in the 
entries: “Alcohol” on page 465, “All-Purpose 
Insect Pest Spray” on page 466, “Ammonia" 
on page 466, “Baking Soda” on page 467, 
“Bleach” on page 467, “Bug Juice” on page 
468, “Compost Tea” on page 471, "False Hel­
lebore” on page 472, ‘ Garlic Oil” on page 473, 
“Herbal Sprays” on page 473, “Horsetail Spray” 
below, “Hot Dusts” on page 476, “Neem” on 
page 477, “Pyrethrin” on page 480, “Quassia” 
on page 481, “Soap Sprays" on page 483, “Starch 
Spray” on page 484, and “Tomato-Leaf Spray” 
on page 485.
Horsetail Spray
Some organic and biodynamic gardeners 
use the common weed horsetail (Equisetum 
arvense) as a botanical fungicide to prevent 
and control plant diseases.
Protection Offered: In general, horse­
tail is used as a protectant fungicide. Although 
its use is popular among backyard gardeners, 
it hasn't been scientifically tested for fungici­
dal properties.
How to Use: You can buy dried horse­
tail from organic and biodynamic garden sup­
pliers. In a glass or stainless steel pot, mix 
*4 cup of dried leaves in 1 gallon of unchlori- 
nated water. (If you have chlorinated tap water, 
either collect rainwater or let the tap water sit 
uncovered for 2 days so the chlorine will vola­
tilize.) Bring to a boil, then let simmer for at 
least V2 hour. Cool and strain through cheese­
cloth. This mixture will keep for 1 month, stored 
in a glass container. Be sure to label it!

476 
■ 
ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
Dilute the horsetail concentrate by add­
ing 5-10 parts unchlorinated water to every 
I part concentrate. Spray infected plants once 
every week to 2 weeks. If you anticipate a 
disease outbreak because of prevailing weather 
conditions, begin a preventive spray program 
before you spot any symptoms. Experiment to 
see which plants and diseases it works best on, 
and keep records for future reference.
Hot Dusts
Many of the culinary seasonings we use, 
like black pepper, chili pepper, dill, ginger, 
paprika, and red pepper, owe their hot stuff 
to capsaicin, a compound shown to repel in­
sects. Researchers have found that as little as 
V* ounce of capsaicin sprinkled around an 
onion plant reduced the number of onion mag­
got eggs laid around the plant by 75 percent, 
compared to untreated plants.
Protection Offered: Use capsaicin dusts 
to repel onion maggots and other root mag­
gots in vegetable seedlings. Pepper dusts will 
help repel ants, thus controlling the aphids 
they protect.
Precautions: Avoid inhaling the dust or 
getting it in your eyes. Contact with hot pep­
pers can irritate sensitive skin, so wear rubber 
gloves when handling.
How to Use: Sprinkle the dust along 
both sides of each seeded row of cabbages, 
carrots, or onions. Make the application band 
at least 6" wider than the planted row. Or 
sprinkle around the base of each plant as far 
out as the largest diameter of the plant top. 
A light application should be effective, but 
the more you use, the better it works. Renew 
after irrigation or a heavy rain.
Lime
Many of our grandparents probably dusted 
plants with agricultural lime to control a vari­
ety of insect pests in the garden.
Protection Offered: This old-fashioned
remedy is effective against a wide range of 
insects. Experiment to see what it controls 
best in your garden.
Precautions: Wear a protective mask to 
avoid inhaling the dust.
How to Use: You can apply lime as often 
as necessary, shaking it through an old strainer, 
window screen, or mechanical duster onto 
plants wet with dew. Reapply it after rain or 
high winds.
Lime-Sulfur
Adding lime to sulfur enhances its fungi­
cidal properties. The lime causes a chemical 
change that allows the sulfur to penetrate the 
leaf tissue. This is an important change, since 
once sulfur penetrates the leaf tissue, it becomes 
an eradicant that can kill recently germinated 
spores. Unfortunately, the boost in fungicidal 
properties also means a greater risk of damag­
ing the plant.
Protection Offered: You can use lime- 
sulfur to help control diseases like anthracnose, 
brown rot. leaf spot, mildew, and scab as well 
as scales on dormant perennials, roses, foun­
dation evergreens, and many fruit crops. It 
also kills mites and scales.
Precautions: Lime-sulfur is extremely 
toxic to mammals and can causc severe eye 
damage and skin irritation. When using it. 
wear rubber gloves and goggles or other face 
protection. Lime-sulfur is more caustic than 
pure sulfur, so it is more likely to damage the 
host plant if used improperly. If you have 
sprayed plants with horticultural oil, wait 2-3 
weeks before using a sulfur product. Avoid 
spraying during periods when temperatures 
will exceed 85°F to prevent plant damage. 
Lime-sulfur discolors wood and painted 
surfaces, so use with caution around structures.
How to Use: Buy lime-sulfur as a liquid 
concentrate. In early spring, spray it on dor­
m ant shrubs, like lilacs and roses, and 
evergreens, such as junipers. You can control

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS 
■ 
477
powdery mildew on roses by applying lime- 
sulfur when the buds break in spring and by 
repeating the application 1 week later. Spray 
raspberries infected with anthracnose or blight 
when the buds first show silver. Spray currants 
and gooseberries infected with anthracnose 
at bud break, and repeat 10-15 days later.
Mineral Oil
Mineral oil has insecticidal properties and 
is sometimes mixed with other materials such 
as soap or garlic to control garden pests. See 
“Garlic Oil" on page 473 for a recipe for a 
homemade insecticidal spray containing gar­
lic and mineral oil.
Protection Offered: Mineral oil works 
physically, trapping pests on plant surfaces 
and gumming up their wings and body coatings, 
causing suffocation. Placed on wilted corn 
silks, mineral oil prevents com earworms from 
crawling down into the husks to feed.
How to Use: To use mineral oil to con­
trol corn earworms, apply a drop or 2 to the 
tip of each ear of com after the silks have 
wilted.
Neem
Neem (also known as azadirachtin) is an 
insecticide extracted from the seeds of the 
neem tree (Azadirachta indica) common in 
most of Africa and India. It is closely related 
to the chinaberry tree (Melia azadamch). com­
mon in the southern and southeastern United 
States. Extracts of both trees have insecticidal 
properties. Neem is unique among pesticides 
since it has so many uses: It acts as a broad- 
spectrum repellent, growth regulator, and insect 
poison. It discourages feeding by making plants 
unpalatable to insects; if they still attack, it 
inhibits their ability to molt and lay eggs.
Unlike most botanical insecticides, neem 
also has somewhat of a “systemic" effect. This 
means that plants can take up neem extracts 
through their roots and leaves, spreading the
material throughout the plant tissues. That’s 
how neem can help to control pests like 
leafminers, which feed within leaves and are 
normally not bothered by sprays that only 
cover the outsides of the plant.
Protection Offered: Use neem to kill a 
wide range of pests, including aphids, gypsy 
moths, leafminers, loopers, mealybugs, thrips, 
and whiteflies. It kills the difficult pests, like 
Colorado potato beetles, com  earworms, cu­
cumber beetles, flea beetles, Mexican bean 
beetles, and pest mites. Until recently, the use 
of neem was restricted to nonfood plants like 
ornamentals, trees, and shrubs in and around 
greenhouses, nurseries, and homes. The Envi­
ronmental Protection Agency has now ex­
panded the restriction of neem products to 
include vegetable and fruit crops as well as 
ornamentals.
Precautions: Neem is almost nontoxic 
to mammals and is biodegradable. It is used in 
India as an ingredient in toothpaste, soap, 
cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and cattle feed. 
The seeds and extracts of both neem and 
chinaberry trees, however, are poisonous if 
consumed. Because neem's chemical struc­
ture is so complex, scientists hypothesize that 
it will take a long time for pests to develop 
resistance to it.
Since neem generally must be ingested 
for it to be toxic, its effect on spiders, honey­
bees, and other beneficial creatures is usually 
minimal. It can, however, sometimes harm 
parasites that prey on insects that have eaten 
neem-sprayed foliage. It’s possible that re­
peated use of neem could also lead to pest 
resistance, as it has with other pesticides. To 
minimize the chance of affecting beneficials 
and encouraging pest resistance, use neem 
sprays only when absolutely necessary, and 
only on plants that you know contain pest 
insects. Alternating neem sprays with insecti­
cidal soap or other treatments may be most 
effective.

478 
■ 
ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
New News on Neem
R
ecent research indicates that neem may 
be good for more than pest control-it 
can help stop plant diseases, too! When 
sprayed on plant leaves, the oil extracted 
from neem seeds provides a protective coat­
ing that blocks fungal spores and prevents 
disease development.
Researchers aren't sure exactly how neem 
oil protects the plant from infection, but they 
do know that it works against several com­
mon fungal diseases, including powdery mil­
dew and rust. Tests showed that a spray of 
1 -percent neem oil controlled 95 to 100 per­
cent of the powdery mildew on hydrangeas, 
phlox, and lilacs. When repeated every 7-14 
days, the neem oil sprays provided protection 
through the season without damage to the 
plants. Preliminary test results show that neem 
oil may even help stop infections that hove 
already started. Besides being effective as a 
fungicide, neem oil may also help to control 
pests, including spider mites.
The neem products currently sold for 
pest control contain a seed extract known as 
azadirachtin, and not neem oil, so they do not 
have any fungicidal activity. But it's possible 
thot neem oil products for controlling both 
pests and diseases may be available in the 
future.
Alternately, you could shred 1 pound of 
whole neem or chinaberry fruit in an old blender 
or food processor. Since chinaberries are 
poisonous, you must use a blender or food 
processor that is reserved for yard use and not 
food preparation. After shredding, add enough 
water to cover the pulp, and let stand overnight. 
The next day, strain and discard the pulp and 
add water to the strained liquid to make 4*5
quarts of spray mixture. Add */i6 teaspoon 
liquid dish soap or insecticidal soap to improve 
sticking. The mix should remain effective for
3-4 days if stored in a dark place. Keep it in a 
tightly sealed, labeled container.
Pests can tell the difference between 
treated and untreated plant parts, so when 
you spray, make sure you cover all plant parts 
thoroughly and evenly to get the best results.
Neem com pounds break down fairly 
quickly—usually in 5 to 7 days—in sunlight 
and in the soil, so you may need to repeat the 
application during the growing season to deal 
w'ith new pests that arrive through the summer. 
Pests on treated plants may not show any 
effects right away; in fact, they may continue 
feeding lightly on plants until the spray takes 
effect. (On adult insects, in fact, you may not 
see any direct effect, but they may in fact 
produce few or no offspring, reducing future 
damage.)
Neem works fastest during hot weather, 
so expect results within a few days in summer; 
spring and fall applications may take longer. 
Heavy rain within a few days after the applica­
tion may wash the spray off the leaves; reap­
ply if pests are still a problem.
Commercial Products: Bioneem/Neem- 
isis, Neem-Away
Nicotine
Nicotine is a highly poisonous alkaloid, 
extracted from special tobacco selected for its 
high nicotine content. When used as an 
insecticide, nicotine products are poisonous 
to most plant pests, including aphids, mealy­
bugs, scales, and spider mites. However, nico­
tine is also highly toxic to mammals when 
taken internally or absorbed through the skin— 
more toxic, in fact, than many synthetic 
pesticides. It remains toxic on leaf surfaces 
for several weeks after an application. Also, 
nicotine products may contain the pathogen 
that causes tobacco mosaic virus in related

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS 
■ 
479
plants, including eggplant, peppers, tomatoes, 
and potatoes.
For these reasons, commercial and home­
made nicotine sprays and dusts are no longer 
recommended for use in organic gardens. 
Instead, choose safer control measures, such 
as insecticidal soap or neem sprays to control 
garden pests.
Oil Sprays
Prior to the 1970s, orchardists sprayed 
their fruit trees each spring with heavy petro­
leum oils known as dormant oils, which killed 
insect pests and their overwintering stages 
before the next season began. It was impor­
tant to spray before leafing out, since the heavy 
oil damaged the leaves of plants.
Most of today’s horticultural oil sprays 
are lighter and contain fewer of the impurities 
that made the heavy dormant oils phytotoxic, 
so they can be used year-round on a variety of 
plants. These products are called superior, 
summer, or supreme oils. They are especially 
effective at controlling pests because they 
spread thoroughly over the leaf surface. They 
work physically to smother and kill pests and 
their eggs, and may also have some repellent 
properties.
Superior oils are designated by their purity. 
If in doubt, read the label: They must contain 
at least 92 percent unsulfonated residues and 
no more than 8 percent sulfonated aromatics 
or impurities. Most of the horticultural oils 
available today are this new, lighter version, 
although the product names may have remained 
the same. Use the new oils as both a dormant 
and summer spray to control pests on garden 
and orchard plants.
Protection Offered: Superior oils are 
unique because they control a broad variety 
of insect pests while going easy on the benefi­
cial insects. Use superior oils to control aphids, 
mealybugs, mites, and scales on a variety of 
fruit, nut, ornamental, and shade trees.
In addition, the new oils may have fungi­
cidal properties (although they aren't yet reg­
istered for this use). Some of the oils have 
shown promise as herbicides. These products 
have been formulated with a greater concen- 
tation of the phytotoxic impurities, to kill 
weeds by dissolving their cell walls. On con­
tact, the plant sap leaks from the cells, killing 
the plant.
Precautions: The light superior oils devel­
oped for controlling insect pests break down 
quickly and are less toxic to beneficials and 
the environment than other insecticides. They 
are slightly toxic to mammals and humans. 
They do not harm most garden plants when 
mixed according to label directions. (An excep­
tion is blue spruce, Picea pungens: The oil 
removes the bluish frost and it may take 2-3 
years for the normal color to return.) If your 
plant is not listed on the label, it is a good idea 
to test the oil on a few leaves before treating 
the whole plant.
Don't spray water-stressed plants unless 
you irrigate them thoroughly before spraying. 
Avoid using the oils on plants weakened by 
disease, drying winds, or high-nitrogen appli­
cations. Don't apply if daytime temperatures 
are likely to exceed 85°F or night tempera­
tures are expected to fall below freezing. Never 
apply oils within 1 month before or after apply­
ing sprays containing sulfur.
How to Use: Horticultural oils are con­
centrated and must be mixed with water. The
oil and water mix forms an emulsion: tiny 
droplets of oil suspended evenly in the water. 
Use a 3 percent solution for a dormant appli­
cation in early spring before buds appear. Spray 
a 2 percent solution against insects and mites 
on plants in full leaf if environmental condi­
tions are right. To make a 2 percent solution, 
pour x/y cup oil into a 1-gallon container, then 
fill with water to make 1 gallon of solution. For 
a 3 percent solution, start with V2 cup of oil. 
Apply successive sprays at least 6 weeks apart.

480 
■ 
ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
You can apply a 1 percent oil solution 
(2ft tablespoons of oil mixed with enough 
water to make 1 gallon of spray) on plants that 
cannot tolerate higher concentrations, on 
rutabagas, and on cucumber and tomato plants 
in the greenhouse. Spray plants until the leaves 
are well-coated and some solution starts to 
drip from the leaves. Apply at weekly inter­
vals as needed. A 3-day period between the 
last spray and harvest is required for green­
house crops; leave 21 days between spraying 
and harvesting rutabagas. Spray early in the 
morning or in the evening to avoid direct sun­
light. Wait 24 hours before using other sprays.
Before spraying oil on citrus crops, check 
with local Cooperative Extension Service agents 
for the best timing of sprays for your area and 
cultivars. On lemons, oils are usually applied 
in April and May; for other citrus crops, oils 
are used in late summer or fall. (Navel oranges 
are very susceptible to damage from oil. so do 
not spray them after September 1.) Avoid treat­
ing citrus trees while mature fruit is present, 
because fruit may drop or the color and qual­
ity may suffer.
Commercial Products: SunSpray Ultra- 
Fine Oil, Volck Oil Spray
Pheromones
When insects are ready to reproduce, 
they depend on chemical signals, called sex 
pheromones. to help find mates. Mature females 
emit the pheromones, and males of the same 
species are able to detect them in extremely 
low concentrations from far away. The males 
follow the chemical signal in order to find 
receptive females. You can make or buy phero­
mone lures to intercept and trap pests before 
they reach your garden. Some products use 
pheromones as mating disruption lures. These 
products work by flooding the air with female 
sex pheromones. making it difficult for male 
insects to find the females for mating. Phero­
mones have been used extensively in commer­
cial horticulture to reduce the amount and 
frequency of use of conventional pesticides. 
Refer to "Pheromone Traps’ on page 437 for 
more information about the use of pheromones 
in pest control.
Protection Offered: Mating disruption 
lures can reduce the damage caused by pests 
such as codling moths, grape berry moths, 
and oriental fruit moths. Lures for more pests 
may be available in the future.
How to Use: Lures are available as twist 
ties or patches; apply according to label 
directions. Make the first application in early 
spring before the moths emerge; reapply 3 
months later to continue protection through­
out the summer. Mating disruption lures seem 
to work best when applied over a large area, 
such as an orchard. If you want to use them to 
protect one tree or a few trees in your backyard, 
apply the lures to other plants or structures 
(such as fences) th ro u g h o u t y o u r property.
Commercial Products: lsomate ties
Pyrethrin
The pyrethrum daisies Chrysanthemum 
(— Tan ace turn) cinerariifolium and C. cocci- 
neurn contain several compounds that kill insect 
pests on contact. You can purchase this insec­
ticide in several forms: The dried flower heads 
are called pyre//jn/m. while the extracted active 
ingredients are called pyrethrin. (Pyrethroids 
are synthetic versions of the insecticide that 
are even more toxic to insects.)
Protection Offered: Pyrethrin products 
are broad-spectrum  insect nerve poisons 
approved for controlling pests on flowers, fruits, 
and vegetables in the garden and greenhouse. 
Use them to control many chewing and suck­
ing insects, including most aphids, cabbage 
loopers, celery leaftiers, codling moths, Colo­
rado potato beetles, leafhoppers, Mexican bean 
beetles, spider mites, stink bugs, thrips, tomato 
pinworms, and whiteflies. Pyrethrin products 
are less effective on diamondback moths, flea

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS ■ 
481
beetles, imported cabbageworms, pear psyllas, 
and tarnished plant bugs.
Precautions: Pyrethrin insecticides are 
moderately toxic to mammals. They will kill 
lady beetles but do not appear to be harmful 
to bees. Be aware that many commercial prod­
ucts contain the synergist piperonyl butoxide 
to enhance the toxicity of the pyrethrin. (See 
"The Other Ingredients" on page 469 for more 
information.)
If you suffer from hay fever, avoid contact 
with pvrethrum flowers; some people have 
allergic reactions to them. Pyrethrin and related 
products tend to work best at the lower end of 
summertime temperatures and are less effec­
tive when temperatures exceed 80°F
How to Use: You can purchase pyre­
thrin products alone or com bined with 
fungicides, like copper or sulfur. To apply 
pyrethrin safely and effectively, wear protec­
tive clothing and follow label directions for 
mixing, spraying, or dusting. Two applications 
may be necessary for complete control.
Or, you can grow your own pyrethrum 
daisies. Pick the blossoms in full bloom (when 
the concentration of pyrethrin is at its peak) 
and hang them in a sheltered, dark and dry 
place. When the flowers are thoroughly dry, 
store them in a tightly sealed, labeled con­
tainer in a dark, cool spot. To use, grind the 
flowers with a mortar and pestle, then mix the 
powder with a little liquid dish soap and enough 
water to make a sprayable solution. You’ll 
have to experiment with proportions, because 
the concentration of pyrethrin in home-grown 
flowers is variable. If your spray doesn’t seem 
to kill the pests, try a more concentrated solu­
tion the next time.
You can also extract the pyrethrin in 
alcohol. Soak 1 cup of packed fresh pyre­
thrum daisy flower heads with V# cup of 70 
percent isopropyl alcohol; cover the container 
and let sit overnight. Strain the mixture through 
cheesecloth, then store the extract in a tightly
sealed and labeled container. When you need 
to use the pyrethrin, add 3 quarts water to the 
extract to make a spray.
Commercial Products: Entire (soap and 
pyrethrins, without piperonyl butoxide). Safer 
Yard and Garden Insect Killer
Quassia
Bitterwood fQuassia amara) is a Latin 
American tree. The wood and bark contain 
quassia, an insecticide used for controlling 
several garden pests.
Protection Offered: Quassia controls 
aphids, caterpillars, Colorado potato beetle 
larvae, sawflies. and several species of flies.
Precautions: Quassia was once used as 
a substitute for hops in making beer, and it has 
long been used as a medicinal herb, so it 
appears to be fairly safe to use. It is one of the 
few botanical insecticides that seems to go 
easy on the beneficials like lady beetles and 
honeybees.
How to Use: Purchase quassia bark chips 
and shavings in natural food stores. To make a 
spray, crush, grind, or chop 1/a cup of bark 
chips and add them to 1-2 quarts of boiling 
water. Allow the mixture to cool, then strain 
and use the liquid to spray pest insects. Or, 
steep the bark chips overnight in 1-2 quarts 
cool water, then strain and spray the liquid. 
Spray plants thoroughly, including the under­
sides of leaves. Spray as often as twice a week 
to control pests once they begin damaging 
your plants.
Some sources indicate that the extract has 
less insecticidal power than the wood chips 
used alone. Try spreading the wood chips on soil 
at the base of plants for long-lasting control.
Rotenone
Rotenone occurs naturally in more than 
65 species of plants; however, most commercial 
supplies come from Peruvian cube, Malay­
sian derris, or Brazilian tembo plants. When

482 
■ 
ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
Choose 
Botanicals Carefully
F
or mony years, botanical insecticides have 
been a mainstay in the arsenal of organic 
pest control products. As a group, botanicals 
share one advantage over synthetic chemi­
cal pesticides: They usually break down within 
a few days after they are applied. This means 
that beneficial species are at risk for only a 
relatively short period. There's also less likeli­
hood of long-term environmental contamina­
tion. Plus, botanicals are less likely to persist 
as residues on harvested food.
But these good points don't mean that 
all botanicals are equally safe for garden use. 
Before nicotine breaks down, for instance, it 
is one of the most toxic poisons known. 
Rotenone, ryania, ond sabodilla are also very 
toxic compounds. Besides killing pests, they 
can also kill bees and other pollinators; rote­
none is particularly toxic to birds and fish, as 
well. These materials are also moderately to 
very toxic to people and pets. There ore addi­
tional concerns that rotenone residue may 
last longer on food than w as previously thought.
Today, there are many effective, non­
toxic methods and materials available to 
organic gardeners for managing all kinds of 
pest problems. These older botanicals aren't 
needed any longer. By following the problem 
prevention and control tips outlined in this 
book, you'll get great results in your garden 
without having to resort to these older botan­
ical controls.
fewer pest-control options were available, rote­
none was a common item on the organic gar­
dener’s shelf since it was considered safer to 
use than the synthetic insecticides. Its impor­
tance has lessened since new research high­
lighted the deadliness of this natural poison, 
and since safer organic practices have been 
discovered.
Rotenone’s insecticidal property is broad 
spectrum, so beneficial insects are killed on 
contact along with the pests. It is moderately 
toxic to people and most animals and very 
toxic to swine, birds, and fish. Some people 
are highly allergic to rotenone on food crops 
and suffer from violent reactions even after a 
week-long post-spray period, sometimes even 
after the food has been cooked. New evidence 
suggests that rotenone may cause growth abnor­
malities in laboratory animals.
For all of these reasons, rotenone is no 
longer recommended for use in organic gardens. 
Rely on safer options, such as row covers to 
keep pests off plants or sprays of neem or 
pyrethrin to deal with infestations that do occur.
Ryania
Ryanodine is the active, insecticidal 
ingredient of a tropical shrub (Ryania speciosa). 
For years, this botanical insecticide has been 
recommended for use against citrus thrips, 
com earworms. European corn borers, cod­
ling moths, and a variety of other pests. 
However, ryania is also quite toxic to mam­
mals and water life. For this reason, it’s better 
to rely on safer pest control measures, such as 
insecticidal soap, neem, or pyrethrin.
Sabadilla
Like nicotine and ryania, sabadilla owes 
its insecticidal powers to several poisonous 
alkaloids. It is m ade from the seeds of 
Schoenocaulon officinale, a lilylike plant found 
in Venezuela.
This powerful botanical insecticide has 
been used to control a variety of garden pests, 
including aphids, flea beetles, tarnished plant 
bugs, and thrips. Unfortunately, sabadilla is 
also moderately toxic to mammals and causes 
violent allergic reactions in susceptible in­

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS 
■ 
483
dividuals. It is toxic to honeybees, too. For 
these reasons, it’s better to stick with milder 
control measures, such as insecticidal soap, 
neem, or pyrethrin sprays.
Salt
Sodium chloride rock salt (NaCl) has been 
shown to help improve asparagus production 
while helping plants to resist disease.
Protection Offered: Sodium chloride rock 
salt helps asparagus resist crown and root rot 
diseases caused by Fusarium fungi.
Precautions: Iodized table salt (NaCl) 
and rock salt made from calcium chloride 
(CaCl) are not recommended. Older plants 
are more salt-tolerant than young ones, so 
wait a year after planting a new bed before 
applying salt.
How to Use: Add 2 pounds of sodium 
chloride rock salt (also sold as pickling salt) 
per 100 square feet of asparagus bed. Apply 
the salt in early spring, or later in summer 
(early July).
Soap Sprays
For many years, organic gardeners used 
solutions of water and natural soaps for con­
trolling garden pests. This old home remedy 
involved simmering a pot of water with chunks 
of Fels Naptha soap, straining it. and coating 
garden plants with the suds to control aphids 
and thrips. Since then, scientists have discov­
ered that the salts of fatty acids found in many 
soaps act as selective insecticides. Insectici­
dal soaps control insect pests by penetrating 
their cuticles, which causes their cell mem­
branes to collapse and leak, resulting in dehy­
dration. While some insects can overcome the 
effects of a soap spray, others are immediately 
affected and die.
Protection Offered: Use insecticidal soaps 
to control soft-bodied insects like aphids, 
mealybugs, and whiteflies. It also works on 
chiggers. earwigs, fleas, mites, scales, thrips.
and ticks. The soap is less effective on chew­
ing insects like caterpillars and beetles.
You can also purchase a fungicidal ver­
sion to control powdery mildew, black spot, 
brown canker, leaf spot, and rust on ornamen­
tal and food plants. Still another soap product 
contains high levels of the contents that make 
soap poisonous to plants; it is available as an 
organic herbicide.
Precautions: All soaps have phytotoxic 
properties, so test the kind you plan to spray 
on a few leaves before treating whole plants. 
Plants with thin cuticles, like beans. Chinese 
cabbage, cucumbers, ferns, gardenias, Japan­
ese maples, nasturtiums, and young peas, are 
easily damaged by soap sprays. Tomatoes and 
potatoes are less susceptible to damage, and 
thick-leaved cabbages seem virtually imper­
vious, although heavy soap use may reduce 
yields. A good rule is to use no more than 3 
successive sprays on any plant.
For all of their pesticidal properties, insec­
ticidal soaps are nontoxic to humans and to 
other test animals, and they biodegrade rap­
idly in the soil. They will, however, kill benefi­
cial insects along with the pests, so limit their 
use to problem areas. Herbicidal soaps will 
affect any plant that they are sprayed on, so 
use with care around valuable ornamentals.
How to Use: You can use household 
soaps such as Ivory Snow, Ivory Liquid, or 
Shaklee's Basic H to make your own insectici­
dal soap solution. Since manufacturers often 
make small changes in their soaps’ contents, 
the effectiveness of homemade solutions may 
vary more than that of commercial insectici­
dal soaps.
Be aware that many products commonly 
known as soap also contain impurities, such 
as perfumes and whiteners, that can damage 
plants. For pest control, it is important to use 
pure soap: avoid detergents or soaps with 
additives.
To prepare a homemade soap solution.

484 
■ ORGANIC SPRAYS AND DUSTS
mix from 1 teaspoon to several tablespoons of 
soap per gallon of water. Start at the lower 
concentration and adjust the strength to max­
imize pest control while avoiding plant damage.
To control aphids, spray when the first 
aphid colonies develop in early spring and 
again when winged females arrive. Use yellow 
sticky traps to monitor pest populations: see 
"Sticky Boards" on page 438 for instructions 
on making yellow sticky traps. If aphids are a 
continuous problem, make several applica­
tions about 2 weeks apart. Spray during cool, 
humid, or foggy weather to improve control. 
To control plant bugs, spray as soon as nymphs 
begin feeding. To control mites, use a high- 
pressure spray, like that of a hose-end sprayer, 
that washes away many pests and kills those 
that remain. Repeal 7-10 days later to kill 
newly hatched mites.
You can mix soaps with other insecti­
cides like BTK. horticultural oil. and pyre­
thrin to boost their toxicity. You can also mix 
homemade soap or liquid dish soap with cook­
ing oil to boost the effectiveness of both insec­
ticidal ingredients.
Mix 1 tablespoon of liquid dish soap and 
1 cup of oil (peanut, safflower, corn, soybean, 
or sunflower). When you're ready to spray, 
mix 1 to 2ft teaspoons of the prepared base to
1 cup of water. The mixture has been used 
successfully to control a variety of pests on 
carrots, celery, cucumber, eggplant, lettuce, 
and peppers. However, some plants may be 
injured by the oil. so test the spray on a few 
leaves and wait several days before spraying 
all of your plants.
Herbicidal soaps are most effective on 
young weeds with tender leaf tissue. They are 
not very effective against mature perennial 
weeds, especially those with tap roots. Spray 
on weeds according to label directions.
Commercial Products: Aphid-Mite At­
tack. Safer Garden Fungicide (soap and sulfur).
Safer Insecticidal Soap, Savona, Superfast 
(herbicidal)
Starch Spray
Starches like ordinary baking flour and 
potato starch dextrin work to control insect 
pests by gumming up the leaf surfaces, trap­
ping and holding the critters until they die. 
Flour is an old-fashioned pest control, but 
dextrin is the object of recent attention by 
researchers looking for new and safe insecti­
cides. Dextrin is actually a sticky sugar extracted 
from potato starch.
Protection Offered: You can use potato 
starch dextrin to control aphids, spider mites, 
thrips. and whiteflies. It also controls pow­
dery mildew on cucumbers. Other uses will 
likely be recommended once a commercial 
product reaches the market. Flour is a good 
control for larger pests like imported cabbage­
worms and loopers on cabbage family crops.
How to Use: Commercial starch insec­
ticides aren't yet available in the United States, 
but you can make your own potato starch 
spray by mixing 2-4 tablespoons of potato 
flour in 1 quart water, and adding 2 or 3 drops 
of liquid dish soap. Shake the mixture, and 
spray to cover the leaves thoroughly. You can 
also apply the flour as a dust. If a residue 
remains on ornamentals, simply wash it away 
with water a few days after the application.
Sulfur
Sulfur is one of the oldest pesticides known. 
It has been used for centuries to control both 
plant pathogens and pests like insects and 
mites on contact. Sulfur is mined from natural 
deposits as a yellow solid that is almost insolu­
ble in water. Wettable sulfur is finely ground 
sulfur mixed with a wetting agent to help it go 
into solution. Sulfur is also formulated as a

ORGANIC CONTROL PRODUCTS ■ 
485
finely ground dust with 1-5 percent clay or 
talc added to enhance dusting qualities.
Protection Offered: Sulfur can be pur­
chased alone or mixed with other insecticides 
and inorganic fungicides to control a wide 
variety of garden pests. Use sulfur as an insec­
ticide to control insects and mites on fruit 
trees and citrus. You can also use sulfur as a 
protectant fungicide. It is effective against 
apple scab, brown rot of stone fruits, powdery 
mildews, rose black spot, rusts, and other plant 
diseases on many crops, including grapes, 
potatoes, strawberries, and tomatoes.
Precautions: Sulfur is moderately toxic 
to humans and other mammals. It can irritate 
or damage the lungs, skin, or eyes if not used 
carefully. Wear protective clothing when apply­
ing sulfur. Although it is more toxic to mites 
than to insects, sulfur is nonspecific and can 
kill beneficial insects, soil microorganisms, 
and fish. Do not apply it within 1 month of 
using an oil spray: use a copper fungicide in­
stead. Sulfur spray may cause plant injury if 
applied when temperatures exceed 80°F It 
is corrosive to metal, so use a sprayer with 
plastic parts: rinse equipment thoroughly 
after use.
How to Use: You can buy sulfur as a dry 
powder for dusting on plants or as a wettable 
formulation (also known as flowable sulfur) 
that mixes readily with water. Some sulfur 
products are colloidal, which means they have 
very fine particles that disperse over the leaf 
surfaces to provide excellent protection. Non-
colloidal sulfur is made of larger particles that 
will leave unprotected areas on the leaf surfaces. 
Mix sulfur solutions according to the instruc­
tions on the label, agitating it frequently since 
it tends to settle out of solution.
Commercial Products: Bonide Liquid 
Sulfur, Safer Garden Fungicide, That Flow- 
able Sulfur
Tomato-Leaf Spray
Tomatoes and potatoes have significant 
am ounts of poisonous com pounds called 
alkaloids in their leaves. Instead of acting as 
an insecticide, however, sprays made from 
tomato leaves appear to reduce pest damage 
by attracting natural pest enemies searching 
for their prey.
Protection Offered: Use tomato-leaf 
sprays to protect plants from aphids and to 
reduce com earworm damage.
Precautions: Since alkaloids tend to be 
toxic to mammals, use care in handling this 
spray and avoid getting it on your skin. Some 
individuals are extremely allergic to plants in 
the nightshade family. Don't use tomato-leaf 
spray on other nightshade family crops because 
of the risk of spreading mosaic virus.
How to Use: Finely chop 1-2 cups of 
tomato leaves, then soak them overnight in 2 
cups of water. In the morning, strain the slurry 
through cheesecloth, add about 2 more cups 
of water to the strained liquid, and spray, cov­
ering leaves thoroughly.

US D A  PLANT HARDINESS ZO N E M A P
Average annual 
minimum temperature
Temperature (°F)
Betow 50"

COMMON AND BOTANICAL 
NAMES OF PLANTS
Adam’s-needle, Yucca 
Ageratum, Ageratum 
Ajuga, Ajuga 
Albizia, Albizia 
Allium, Allium 
Alumroot, Heuchera 
Amaranth, Amaranthus 
Anemone, Anemone 
Arborvitae, Thuja 
Artemisia, Artemisia 
Ash, Fraxinus 
Aster, Aster 
Astilbe, Astilbe 
Autumn crocus, Colchicum 
Azalea, Rhododendron 
Baby’s-breath, Gypsophila 
Bachelor’s-button, Centaurea 
Balsam, Impatiens 
Barberry, Berberis 
Bee balm, Monarda 
Beech. Fagus 
Begonia, Begonia 
Bellflower, Campanula 
Bergenia, Bergenia 
Birch, Betula 
Bittersweet, Celastrus 
Black-eyed Susan, Rudbeckia 
Blazing-star, Liatris 
Bleeding heart. Dicentra 
Bluebells, Mertensia 
Boston ivy, Parthenocissus 
Boxwood, Buxus 
Brooklime, Veronica 
Browallia, Browallia 
Bugbane, Cimicifuga 
Bugieweed, Ajuga 
Butterfly bush, Buddleia 
Calendula, Calendula 
Camellia, Camellia 
Candytuft, Iberis
Canna, Canna 
Carnation, Dianthus 
Cedar, Cedrus 
Celosia, Celosia 
China aster, Callistephus 
Chrysanthemum, 
Chrysanthemum 
Clematis, Clematis 
Cockscomb, Celosia 
Coleus, Coleus 
Columbine, Aquilegia 
Coneflower, Echinacea.
Rudbeckia 
Coral bells, Heuchera 
Coreopsis, Coreopsis 
Cornflower, Centaurea 
Cosmos, Cosmos 
Cotoneaster, Cotoneaster 
Crab apple, Malus 
Cranesbill, Geranium 
Crape myrtle, Lagerstroemia 
Crocus, Crocus 
Daffodil, Narcissus 
Dahlia, Dahlia 
Daphne, Daphne 
Daylily, Hemerocallis 
Delphinium, Delphinium 
Deutzia, Deutzia 
Dogwood, Cornus 
Dusty miller, Senecio 
Elm, Ulmus
Epimedium, Epimedium 
Euonymus, Euonymus 
False spirea, Astilbe 
Fir, Abies
Firethorn, Pyracantha 
Flag, Iris
Flossflower, Ageratum 
Flowering quince, 
Chaenomeles
Flowering tobacco, Nicotiana 
Forsythia, Forsythia 
Foxglove, Digitalis 
Fritillary, Fritillaria 
Garden mum, 
Chrysanthemum 
Garden portulaca, Portulaca 
Gayfeather. Liatris 
Geranium, Pelargonium 
Glad, Gladiolus 
Gladiolus, Gladiolus 
Gypsophila, Gypsophila 
Harebell, Campanula 
Hawthorn, Crataegus 
Hellebore, Helleborus 
Hemlock, Tsuga 
Hibiscus, Hibiscus 
Holly, Ilex
Holly grape, Mahonia 
Hollyhock, Alcea 
Honey locust, Gleditsia 
Honeysuckle, Lonicera 
Hornbeam, Carpinus 
Horse chestnut, Aesculus 
Hosta, Hosta 
Hyacinth, Hyacinthus 
Hydrangea, Hydrangea 
Impatiens, Impatiens 
Iris, Iris 
Ivy, Hedera 
Juniper, Juniperus 
Lagerstroemia, Lagerstroemia 
Lantana, Lantana 
Larch, Larix 
Larkspur, Delphinium 
Lilac, Syringa 
Lily, Lilium
Lily-of-the-valley, Convallaria 
Linden, Tilia 
Lobelia, Lobelia
487

488 
■ 
COMMON AND BOTANICAL NAMES OF PLANTS
Lupine, Lupinus 
Magnolia, Magnolia 
Mahonia, Mahonia 
Maple, Acer 
Marigold, Tagetes 
Meadow rue, Thalictrum 
Michaelmas daisy, Aster 
Mimosa, Albizia 
Mock orange, Philadelphus 
Morning glory, Ipomoea 
Moss rose, Portulaca 
Mountain ash, Sorbus 
Mountain laurel, Kalmia 
Myrtle, Vinca 
Narcissus, Narcissus 
Nasturtium, Tropaeolum 
Oak, Quercus 
Pachysandra, Pachysandra 
Pansy, Viola
Pelargonium, Pelargonium 
Peony, Paeonia 
Periwinkle, Vinca 
Petunia, Petunia 
Phlox, Phlox 
Pieris, Pieris 
Pine, Pinus 
Pink, Dianthus 
Planetree, Platanus 
Plantain lily, Hosta
Poplar, Populus 
Poppy, Papaver 
Pot marigold. Calendula 
Primrose, Primula 
Privet, Ligustrum 
Purple coneflower, Echinacea 
Pyracantha, Pyracantha 
Red cedar, Juniperus 
Rhododendron, 
Rhododendron 
Rock cress, Arabis 
Rose, Rosa
Rose-of-Sharon, Hibiscus 
Salvia. Salvia 
Sapphire flower, Browallia 
Sedum, Sedum 
Shrub verbena, Lantana 
Silk tree, Albizia 
Snakeroot, Cimicifuga 
Snapdragon, Antirrhinum 
Speedwell, Veronica 
Spindle tree, Euonymus 
Spirea, Spiraea 
Spruce, Picea 
Spurge, Euphorbia, 
Pachysandra 
Stonecrop, Sedum 
Strawflower, Helichrysum 
Sunflower, Helianthus
Sweet alyssum, Lobularia 
Sweet gum, Liquidambar 
Sweet pea, Lathyrus 
Sycamore, Platanus 
Thunbergia, Thunbergia 
Tickseed, Coreopsis 
Tulip tree, Liriodendron 
Tulip, Tulipa 
Verbena, Verbena 
Vervain, Verbena 
Viburnum, Viburnum 
Vinca, Vinca 
Virginia creeper, 
Parthenocissus 
Weigela, Weigela 
Willow, Salix 
Windflower, Anemone 
Wisteria. Wisteria 
Witch hazel, Hamamelis 
Woodbine, Parthenocissus 
Wormwood. Artemisia 
Yarrow. Achillea 
Yellow poplar, Liriodendron 
Yew, Taxus 
Yucca, Yucca 
Zinnia, Zinnia
Zonal geranium. Pelargonium
iai

SOURCES
Seeds and Plants 
for Disease- and 
Insect-Resistant Cultivars
The following companies sell seeds and 
plants of many disease- and insect-resistant 
fruit and vegetable cultivars. Many of these 
companies also offer flower seeds as well as 
trees, shrubs, and perennials.
Adams County Nursery, Inc.
RO. Box 108 '
Aspers, PA 17304
Ames’ Orchard and Nursery 
18292 Wildlife Rd.
Fayetteville, AR 72701
Bear Creek Nursery 
P.O. Box 411 
Northport, WA 99157
W. Atlee Burpee & Co.
300 Park Ave.
Warminster, PA 18974
C & O Nursery 
RO. Box 116
Wenatchee, WA 98807-0116
Country Heritage Nursery, Inc.
P.O. Box 536 
Hartford, MI 49057
Cumberland Valley Nurseries, Inc.
P.O. Box 471 
McMinnville, TN 37110
Farmer Seed and Nursery Co.
818 N.W. 4th St.
Faribault, MN 55021
Henry Field’s Seed & Nursery Co. 
415 N. Burnett St.
Shenandoah, IA 51602
Gurney’s Seed & Nursery Co.
110 Capital St.
Yankton, SD 57079
Harris Seeds 
RO. Box 22960 
60 Saginaw Dr.
Rochester, NY 14692
Hollydale Nursery 
RO. Box 69 
Pelham, TN 37366
Johnny's Selected Seeds 
310 Foss Hill Rd.
Albion, ME 04910
J. W. Jung Seed Co.
335 S. High St.
Randolph, WI 53957
Kelly Nurseries 
Division of Plantron, Inc.
410 8th Ave. NW 
Faribault, MN 55021
Orol Ledden & Sons 
RO. Box 7
Center & Atlantic Aves.
Sewell, NJ 08080
Liberty Seed Co.
RO. Box 806 
461 Robinson Rd.
New Philadelphia, OH 44663
Mellinger’s, Inc.
2310 W. South Range Rd.
North Lima, OH 44452
489

490 
■ 
SOURCES
J. E. Miller Nurseries, Inc.
5060 W. Lake Rd.
Canandaigua, NY 14424
Nichols Garden Nursery 
1190N. Pacific Hwy.
Albany, OR 97321
North Star Gardens 
19060 Manning Trail North 
Marine on St. Croix, MN 55047
Northwoods Retail Nursery 
27635 S. Oglesby Rd.
Camby, OR 97013
Park Seed Co.
RO. Box 31 
Cokesbury Rd.
Greenwood, SC 29647
Pinetree Garden Seeds 
Box 300
New Gloucester, ME 04260
Raintree Nursery 
391 Butts Rd.
Morton, WA 98356
Seeds Bliim 
H.C.33 
Box 2057 
Boise, ID 83706
Shepherd’s Garden Seeds 
30 Irene St.
Torrington, CT 06790
Southern Exposure Seed Exchange 
RO. Box 170 
Earlysville.VA 22936
Southmeadow Fruit Gardens 
10603 Cleveland Ave.
Baroda, MI 49101
Stark Bro's Nurseries & Orchards Co. 
RO. Box 10 
Louisiana, MO 63353
Stokes Seeds. Inc.
P.O. Box 548 
Buffalo, NY 14240
Territorial Seed Co.
RO. Box 157 
20 Palmer Ave.
Cottage Grove, OR 97424
Thompson & Morgan. Inc.
RO. Box 1308 
Jackson, NJ 08527
General Gardening Equipment 
and Supplies
Many organic gardening products are not 
readily available at local garden centers. 
Fortunately, there are many fine mail-order 
suppliers. The following companies offer a 
wide range of merchandise, including botani­
cal pesticides, biological controls, compost­
ing equipment, copper and sulfur fungicides, 
floating row covers, insect traps, organic soil 
amendments and fertilizers, soil test kits, 
sprayers, tillers, tools and accessories, and 
watering equipment.
Gardener’s Supply Co.
128 Intervale Rd.
Burlington, VT 05401
Gardens Alive!
5100Schenley PI.
Lawrenceburg, IN 47025
Harmony Farm Supply 
RO. Box 460 
G raton.CA 95444
Copyrighted material

SOURCES ■ 491
The Kinsman Co., Inc.
River Rd.
Point Pleasant, PA 18930
A.M. Leonard, Inc.
P.O. Box 816 
Piqua, OH 45356
Mantis Manufacturing Corp. 
1028 Street Rd. 
Southampton, PA 18966
The Natural Gardening Co. 
217 San Anselmo Ave.
San Anselmo, CA 94960
Ohio Earth Food, Inc.
5488 Swamp St. NE 
Hartville, OH 44632
Peaceful Valley Farm Supply
P.O. Box 2209
Grass Valley, CA 95945
Smith & Hawken 
RO. Box 6900
2 Arbor Ln.
Florence, KY 41022
The Urban Farmer Store 
2833 Vicente St.
San Francisco, CA 94116
Insect Predators 
and Parasites and Other 
Biological Controls
These companies offer microbial disease 
products, pheromone traps, and insect preda­
tors and parasites. Insectaries specialize in 
rearing pest predators and parasites. Some 
rear several species at their facilities, while 
others raise only one or two and buy the other
species they offer from other insectaries. When 
you place an order, ask whether the insectary 
raises the predator or parasite you're inter­
ested in on site. If not, try to find a direct 
source from which to order. The less shipping 
involved, the better for the health and viabil­
ity of the organisms. If you live in the United 
States and plan to order insects or any other 
organisms from a Canadian firm, you must 
apply for a permit from the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture. Write to U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, APH IS/Plant Protection and 
Q uarantine, 4700 River Road, Unit 133, 
Riverdale, MD 20737; ask for application form 
#526. There is no fee, but it may take up to a 
month to process the necessary paperwork 
before the permit is issued.
Applied Bionomics 
(for U.S. customers)
11074 W. Saanich Rd.
Sidney, B.C.
Canada V8L5P5
OR
Westgro Sales, Inc. and Agrico Sales, Ltd.
(for Canadian customers)
7333 Progress Way 
Delta, B.C.
Canada V4G 1E7
Beneficial Insectary 
14751 Oak Run Rd.
Oak Run, CA 96069
Biofac Crop Care, Inc.
RO. Box 87 
Mathis, TX 78368
Buena Biosystems 
P.O. Box 4008 
Ventura, CA 93007
W. Atlee Burpee & Co.
300 Park Ave.
Warminster, PA 18974
Copyrighted material

492 
■ 
SOURCES
Henry Field’s Seed & Nursery Co. 
415 N. Burnett St.
Shenandoah, IA 51602
Foothill Agricultural Research 
5101/2 West Chase Dr.
Corona, CA 91720
G ardeners Supply Co.
128 Intervale Rd.
Burlington, VT 05401
Gardens Alive!
5100 Schenley PI.
Lawrenceburg, IN 47025
Harmony Farm Supply 
RO. Box 460 
Graton, CA 95444
Hydro-Gardens, Inc.
RO. Box 25845 
Colorado Springs, CO 80936
Mellinger’s, Inc.
2310 W. South Range Rd.
North Lima, OH 44452
The Natural Gardening Co. 
217 San Anselmo Ave.
San Anselmo, CA 94960
Nature's Control 
RO. Box 35 
Medford, OR 97501
Orcon Organic Control, Inc. 
5132 Venice Blvd.
Los Angeles, CA 90019
Peaceful Valley Farm Supply
P.O. Box 2209
Grass Valley, CA 95945
Richters 
RO. Box 26 
Hwy. 47
Goodwood, ONT 
Canada L0C 1A0
Rincon-Vitova Insectaries, Inc 
P.O. Box 1555 
Ventura, CA 93002
ii
Copyrighted material

RECOMMENDED 
READING
General Reference Books
Many Cooperative Extension Services offer 
excellent photo identification guides for dis­
eases and pests of fruits and vegetables. Often 
these are published by the Cooperative Exten­
sion Service of a state land grant university 
and are available to the general public through 
a local Cooperative Extension office. To find 
out which Extension publications are available 
for food crops in your area, call or visit your 
local Cooperative Extension office or contact 
an Extension specialist at your state land grant 
university.
An asterisk (*) next to a title indicates 
that while the book offers valuable information, 
such as good photos and descriptions of vari­
ous insects and plant diseases, it may also 
describe pest and disease remedies and gar­
dening methods that are not organic and thus 
not endorsed by Rodale Press.
Bradley. Fern Marshall, ed. Rodale’s Chemical- 
Free Yard and Garden. Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale 
Press, 1991.
Bradley, Fern Marshall, and Barbara W. Ellis, 
eds. Rodale’s All-New Encyclopedia of Organic 
Gardening. Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale Press, 1992.
Campbell, Stu. Let It Rot: The Gardener's 
Guide to Composting. Charlotte, Vt.: Gar­
den Way Publishing, 1975.
Carr, Anna. Good Neighbors: Companion 
Planting for Gardeners. Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale 
Press, 1985.
Coleman, Eliot. The New Organic Grower: A 
Master's Manual of Tools and Techniques for 
the Home and Market Gardener. Chelsea, 
Vt.: Chelsea Green Publishing Co., 1989.
Cox, Jeff, and the Editors of Rodale’s Organic 
Gardening Magazine. How to Grow Vegeta­
bles Organically. Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale Press,
1988.
•Damrosch, Barbara. The Garden Primer. New 
York: Workman Publishing, 1988.
*Darr, Sheila, Helga Olkowski. and William 
Olkowski. Common-Sense Pest Control. 
Newtown, Ct.: Taunton Press, 1991.
Ellis, Barbara W., ed. Rodale’s Illustrated Ency­
clopedia o f Gardening and Landscaping 
Techniques. Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale Press. 1990.
•Flint, Mary Louise. Pests of the Garden and 
Small Farm: A Grower's Guide to Using Less 
Pesticide. Oakland, Calif.: ANR Publications 
of the University of California, 1990. (Available 
from Publications, Division of Agriculture and 
Natural Resources, University of California, 
6701 San Pablo Ave., Oakland, CA 94608.)
Gershuny, Grace, and Joseph Smillie. The 
Soul of Soil: A Guide to Ecological Soil 
Management. 2nd ed. St. Johnsbury, Vt.: Gaia 
Services, 1986. (Available from Gaia Services, 
R.F.D. 3, Box 84, St. Johnsbury, VT 05819.)
493

494 
■ 
RECOMMENDED READING
Hall-Beyer, Bart, and Jean Richard. Ecologi­
cal Fruit Production in the North. Trois- 
Rivieres, Quebec: 
Jean 
Richard, 
1983. 
(Available from Bart Hall-Beyer, 163 McNamee, 
Scotstown, Quebec, Canada JOB 3B0.)
Halpin, Anne Moyer, and the Editors of Rodale 
Press. Foolproof Planting: How to Success­
fully Start and Propagate More Than 250 
Vegetables, Flowers, Trees, and Shrubs. 
Emmaus. Pa.: Rodale Press, 1990.
Hamilton, Geoff. The Organic Garden Book. 
New York: Crown Publishers, 1987.
Maltas, Michael. “Orchard Pest Management 
and Spray Schedule.” (Available from North- 
woods Nursery, 286% S. Cramer Rd., Molalla, 
OR 97038.)
Martin, Deborah L., and Grace Gershuny, eds. 
The Rodale Book of Composting, rev. ed. 
Emmaus. Pa.: Rodale Press, 1992.
*Page, Stephen, and Joseph Smillie. The Or­
chard Almanac. 2nd ed. Rockport, Maine: 
Spraysaver Publications, 1988. (Available from 
Spraysaver Publications, PO. Box 392, Rock­
port, ME 04856.)
Schultz, Warren. The Chemical-Free Lawn: 
The Newest Varieties and Techniques to Grow 
Lush. Hardy Grass. Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale Press,
1989.
Shigo, Alex L. Tree Pruning: A Worldwide 
Photo Guide. Durham, N.H.: Shigo & Trees 
Assoc., 1989. (Available from Shigo & Trees 
Assoc., 4 Denbow Rd., Durham, NH 03824.)
♦Smith, Michael D., ed. The Ortho Problem 
Solver. 2nd ed. San Francisco: Chevron Chem­
ical Co., 1984.
Stebbins, Robert L., and Michael MacCaskey. 
Pruning: How-To Guide for Gardeners. Los 
Angeles: HPBooks, 1983.
Identification Guides
Borror, Donald J., and Richard E. White. A 
Field Guide to the Insects of America North 
of Mexico. The Peterson Field Guide Series. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1970.
Carr, Anna. Rodale's Color Handbook o f Gar­
den Insects. Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale Press, 1979.
•Davidson, Ralph H., and William F Lyon. 
Insect Pests o f Farm. Garden, and Orchard. 
8th ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1987.
•Johnson, Warren T., and Howard H. Lyon. 
Insects That Feed on Trees and Shrubs. 2nd 
ed. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1988.
MacNab, A. A., A. E Sherf, and J. K. Springer. 
Identifying Diseases of Vegetables. Univer­
sity Park, Pa.: The Pennsylvania State Univer­
sity College of Agriculture, 1983. (Available 
from The Publications Distribution Center, 
112 Agricultural Administration Building, Uni­
versity Park, PA 16802.)
M ilne, Lorus, and M argery M ilne. The 
Audubon Society Field Guide to North Amer­
ican Insects and Spiders. New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1980.
Muenscher, Walter Conrad. Weeds. 2nd ed. 
New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1955. 
(Reprint, with forward and appendixes by Peter 
A. Hyypio. Ithaca, N.Y.: Comstock Publish­
ing Assoc., 1980.)
•Sinclair, Wayne A., Howard. H. Lyon, and 
Warren T. Johnson. Diseases o f Trees and 
Shrubs. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 
1987.
Smith, Miranda, and Anna Carr. Rodales Gar­
den Insect, Disease, and Weed Identification 
Guide. Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale Press, 1988.

RECOMMENDED READING 
■ 
495
*Westcott, Cynthia. The Gardeners Bug Book. 
Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1973.
*--------- . Westcott s Plant Disease Handbook.
5th ed., rev. by R. Kenneth Horst. New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., 1990.
Periodicals
•Common Sense Pest Control Quarterly, Bio- 
Integral Resource Center (BIRC), P.O. Box 
7414, Berkeley, CA 94707.
*Hortldeas, Greg and Patricia Y. Williams, 
Rt. 1, Box 302, Black Lick Rd., Gravel Switch, 
KY 40328.
*National Gardening, National Gardening 
Association, 180 Flynn Ave., Burlington, VT 
05401.
Organic Gardening, Rodale Press, Inc., 33 E. 
Minor St., Emmaus, PA 18098.
*The IPM Practitioner, Bio-Integral Resource 
Center (BIRC), PO. Box 7414, Berkeley, CA 
94707.
Copyrighted material

PHOTOGRAPHY 
CREDITS
Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department 
of Agriculture: p. 270, bottom right; p. 283, top right; 
p. 309. top left; p. 315. top right: p. 335, bottom.
Max E. Badgley: p. 260, top right, bottom right; 
p. 261, top left, center left, and center right, bottom; 
p. 269, top. bottom left; p. 270. bottom left and cen­
ter: p. 271; p. 272, top; p. 273; p. 275, top, bottom left; 
p. 276. top: p. 277, top center; p. 280. bottom center; 
p. 282, top left and center; p. 283, top center, bottom; 
p. 284, top left, bottom: p. 285, top left, bottom; p. 286, 
top right, bottom; p. 287, bottom left; p. 289, top 
left and center; p. 292, top left and center; p. 293, top 
right; p. 296. top left, bottom left and center; p. 297. 
top left; p. 300, bottom center and right; p. 301, top 
left, bottom left: p. 302, top left; p. 303, top right, 
bottom: p. 304; p. 305, top left and right, bottom left; 
p. 306, top; p. 307. bottom; p. 308, top left, bottom; 
p. 316: p. 317, top right; p. 320, top, bottom right; p. 321, 
top. bottom left; p. 322, top left and ccnter, bottom 
left and right; p. 323, bottom; p. 324, top left and 
right; p. 327, bottom left and right; p. 330, top center 
and right, bottom left; p. 331, top left and center: p. 332. 
bottom right; p. 333; p. 334, bottom: p. 335, top left; 
p. 337.
Charlton Photos, Inc.: p. 291, top center, bot­
tom; p. 312. left; p. 315, top left; p. 317. bottom; p. 325, 
bottom; p. 328, top; p. 390. right col., bottom; p. 393, 
left col., bottom.
Clemson University Extension Service and the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture: p. 277, bottom left; 
p. 312, right; p. 313, right; p. 329, bottom; p. 386. 
right col., left.
Crandall & Crandall Photography: p. 330, bot­
tom right. 
Davey Tree Expert Co. (by D. L. Caldwell):
p. 274. top; p. 298. top; p. 301. bottom center and 
right; p. 302. top center and right, bottom left; p. 319. 
top center, bottom right; p. 321, bottom center; p. 397, 
right col., top right.
Dr. John A. Davidson, Department of Entomology, 
University of Maryland at College Park: p. 291, top 
right; p. 318, top.
Department of Plant Pathology, University of 
Illinois: p. 372, right col.; p. 373, left col., top; p. 376. 
left col.; p. 378, left col., top; p. 380, left col., right; 
p. 381. right col., left; p. 384. right col., right: p. 388, 
right col.; p. 389, right col.; p. 394. left col.; p. 395, 
left col., p. 396, left col.; p. 400, right col.
Entomological Society of America/Ries Memo­
rial Slide Collection: p. 325. top left and center; p. 334. 
top left. 
The Fertilizer Institute: p. 379. right col., top.
Tom G ettings, Rodale Press Photography 
Department: p. 381, right col., right; p. 390, right 
col., top.
Dr. Gerald M. Ghidiu, Rutgers Research and 
Development Center: p. 280, top.
L. Gilkeson: p. 260, top left: p. 268, center.
Courtesy of the Ken Gray Collection, Oregon 
State University (available through Eugene Memm- 
ler): p. 277, bottom ccnter and right; p. 279; p. 291, 
top left; p. 312. center; p. 314, top left, bottom.
John Hamel, Rodale Press Photography Depart­
ment: p. 274. bottom right.
Dr. George W. Hudler, College of Agriculture 
and Life Sciences, Cornell University: p. 371, left 
col., left; p. 375, right col.; p. 377, left col.; p. 383, left 
col., bottom; p. 385, right col.; p. 394, right col., 
bottom; p. 397, right col., top left, bottom; p. 398. 
right col.
Dr. Stephen A. Johnston, Rutgers Research and 
Development Center: p. 399. right col. 
Reprinted by permission from Dr. Alan L. 
Jones: p. 391, left col.
Reprinted by permission from Dr. Alan MacNab: 
p. 380, left col., left: p. 384, left col., bottom, right 
col., left.
Bob Mulrooney: p. 374. right col., top; p. 376, 
right col., top.
Nematology Laboratory, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture: p. 309, top right.
New York S tate A gricultural Experim ent 
Station: p. 270. top; p. 282, top right, bottom; p. 287, 
bottom right; p. 289, top right; p. 311; p. 313, left;
496

PHOTOGRAPHY CREDITS ■ 
497
p. 314. top center and right; p. 329, top left; p. 371, 
right col.; p. 373, left col., bottom: p. 374, left col., 
right col., bottom; p. 386, left col., top, right col., 
right; p. 387. right col., bottom; p. 389. left col.
Joe Ogrodnick: p. 260. bottom left; p. 294. top; 
p. 298, bottom right.
Pam Peirce: p. 322. bottom center; p. 386. left 
col., bottom.
Thomas M. Per ring. University of California at 
Riverside: p. 268, left and right. 
Potash & Phosphate Institute: p. 379, left col.
Lee Reich, Ph.D.: p. 388, left col.
Robert Reise, Nematology Laboratory, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture: p. 309. bottom.
Ann F. Rhoads: p. 272. bottom left; p. 372, left 
col.; p. 373, right col.: p. 376. right col., bottom right; 
p. 378, left col., bottom; p. 380. right col.; p. 381, left 
col.; p. 384. left col., top; p. 387. left col.; p. 390. left 
col., top right, bottom: p. 391. right col.; p. 392. left 
col.; p. 397, left col.; p. 399, left col.; p. 401. left col.; 
p. 403, right col.
Rodale Press Photography Department: p. 278; 
p. 286, top left; p. 293, top left; p. 295, center; p. 298, 
bottom center; p. 315, bottom right; p. 331, top right.
E. S. Ross: p. 272, bottom right.
Barbara Rothenberger: p. 290. right; p. 382. 
left col.; p. 385, left col.; p. 393, left col., top.
David Shetlar, Landscape Entomologist, The Ohio 
State University: p. 275, bottom center; p. 281, right; 
p. 292, bottom: p. 294, bottom center; p. 298, bottom 
left; p. 310; p. 315, bottom left; p. 319, top left, top 
right, bottom left; p. 325, top right; p. 327. top; p. 329, 
top right: p. 334, top right.
Patrick Temple, University of California at 
Riverside: p. 378. right col.; p. 379. right col., bottom.
U.S. Department of Agriculture: p. 284, top 
right: p. 295, left and right; p. 322. top right: p. 390. 
left col., top left; p. 398. left col.; p. 402, right col.
Ron West: p. 260. top center left and center 
right, bottom center left and center right: p. 261. top 
right: p. 269. bottom center and right: p. 274. bottom 
left and center; p. 275, bottom right; p. 276. bottom; 
p. 277, top left and right; p. 280, bottom left and right; 
p. 281, left; p. 283. top left; p. 284, top center: p. 285, 
top right; p. 286, top center; p. 287, top; p. 288; p. 289. 
bottom; p. 290. left: p. 292. top right; p. 293. bottom 
left and center: p. 294. bottom left and right; p. 2%. 
top right, bottom right; p. 297. top right, bottom: p. 299; 
p. 300, top. bottom left; p. 301, top center and right: 
p. 302, bottom right: p. 303. top left and center: p. 305. 
top center, bottom right; p. 307. top: p. 308. top cen­
ter and right; p. 309. top center; p. 317, top left; 
p. 318, bottom; p. 320. bottom left; p. 321. bottom 
right: p. 323. top; p. 324. top center, bottom: p. 326: 
p. 327, bottom center; p. 328. bottom; p. 329, top 
center: p. 331. bottom: p. 332. top. bottom left: p. 335. 
top center and right; p. 336; p. 376. right col., bottom 
left; p. 377, right col.: p. 382, right col.; p. 383. left 
col., top. right col.: p. 400. left col.: p. 402. left col.; 
p. 403. left col.
Katharine D. Widin, Ph.D.: p. 293. bottom right: 
p. 306, bottom; p. 330, top left; p. 371. left col., 
right; p. 375, left col.; p. 387. right col., top: p. 392. 
right col.; p. 393, right col.; p. 394. right col., top; 
p. 395, right col.; p. 396. right col. p. 401. right col.
Copyrighted material

INDEX
Note: Page references in italic indicate tables.
Boldface references indicate photographs or illustrations.
A
Abamectins. 466
Abelmoschus esculentus. See Okra 
Abies. 12
Acalymma vittatum. See Cucumber 
beetles, striped 
Acanthoscelides obtectus. See Bean 
weevils 
Acer, 13
anthracnose symptoms on. 321 
problems of, 13 
Verticillium wilt symptoms on, 
396
Acerpalmatum. L3
soap sprays and. 4&3 
Achillea. 14
as attractant crop, 450 
problems of. 14 
Achyra rantalis. See Webworms, garden 
Acidic soil. See Soil, acidic, disease and 
Acid rain. 356
Acrididae. See Grasshoppers 
Actinidia arguta. See Kiwi 
Actinidia deliciosa. See Kiwi 
Actinidia kolomikta. See Kiwi 
Adam's needle. See Yucca ftlamentosa 
Adelgids
Picea and, 181, 182 
Pinus and. 1&3 
Tsuga and, 24flb-41 
Adult insects. 252 
Aesculus. 14
Ageratum. 15
Agrobacterium radiobacter. 369.462 
Agromyzidae. See Leafminers 
Air circulation. 362-63 
Ajuga. 15 
Ajuga rep tans. 15.
Albizia. 15 
Alcea. 16
problems of. 16 
rust symptoms on. 325 
Alcohol sprays. 465=66 
Aleyrodidae. See Whiteflies 
Alfalfa. 418.451
beneficials attracted by. 451 
Alkaloids, as pesticides. 485 
Allium. 16
Allium cepa. See Onion 
Allium ophioscorodon. See Garlic 
Allium sativum. See Garlic 
Allium schoenoprasum. See Chives, 
common
Allium tuberosum. See Chives, garlic 
All-purpose insect pest spray. 466 
Almond, LZ 
Alternaria blight 
cabbage and. 55 
carrot and. 61 
cucumber and. 86 
melon and. 150 
potato and. 190. l£U 
squash and. 214,215.216 
tomato and. 229. 231.232.374
Altosid. 473
Aluminum-coated paper. 367.444 
Alumroot. See Heuchera 
American (see Heuchera 
americana) 
small-flowered [see Heuchera 
micrantha)
Alyssum. sweet. See Lobularia 
Amaranthus. L2 
Amblyseius. citrus and. 22 
Amblyseius cali/omicus. 452 
Amblyseius cucumeris. buying and 
releasing. 455 
American gooseberry mildew. 1Q7.
ma
Ammonia sprays. 466 
Amorbia. See Avocado caterpillars 
Amyelois transitella. See Navel 
orangeworms 
Anasa tristis. See Squash bugs 
Anemone. 17-18 
Anemone blanda. LL L8 
Anemone coronaria. 17.
Anethum graveolens. 22 
Angular leaf spot
cucumber a n d , 86 
melon and. L5Q 
squash and. 214. 215.216 
Animal pests
floating row covers for. 443 
shade cloths for, 445 
stopping.
499

500 
■ 
INDEX
Animals, beneficial. 453 
Annuals. 18-20
leaf problems of. 18-20 
whole plant problems of. 20 
Antagonistic organisms. 462 
Anthracnose
Acer&n<\. 13.371 
Aesculus and. LI 
bean and. 34*3^31386 
Berberis and. 41 
black berry and. 44 
bordeaux mix for. 462 
copper for. 421 
Cornusand.81.371 
cucumber and. Si 
currant and. 86 
eggplant and.23 
Euonymus and. 24. 95 
fruit symptoms. 386-87 
gooseberry and. 108 
grape and. 109, 110. 111 
Ilex and. 123 
leaf symptoms. 321 
Ligustrum and. 141 
lime-sulfur for. 47b. 422 
melon and. L50 
Paeonia and. 152 
pepper and.L2h 
Platanus and. 185 
Quercus and. 124. 
raspberry and. 197,128 
rhubarb and.203 
spinach and.2L2 
Tilia and. 222 
tomato and. 229. 232.386 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 238 
turnip and. 243 
Viburnum and. 242 
walnut and. 251 
Antirrhinum. 20-21 
Antitranspirants. 342.441 
Ants
as aphid predators. 62 
barriers for. 440-41.442 
boric acid for. 4bH 
citrus and. 23 
fig and. 22 
fire. 421.473 
pepper dusts and. 426 
trunk bands for. 446 
Aphidius matricariae. 454
Aphid midges. 268.268
as beneficials. 177.2>ft.4.4H 
buying and releasing. 451 
fungus gnats distinguished from,
260
Aphidoletes aphidimvza. See Aphid 
midges
Aphid parasites, buying and releasing.
Aphids. 262.269 
Abies and. L2 
AceranfS. 13 
alcohol sprays for. 465 
ammonia sprays for. 466 
Anemone and. 18 
Antirrhinum and. 21 
ants and. 440=41 
apple and, 25.269 
Arabis and. 28 
asparagus and. 30 
Aster and. 30 
bean and. 3 1 269 
beet and.37-38 
Begonia and. 40 
Berberis and. 41 
Betula and, 43 
BT and. 452 
bulbs and. 51 
cabbage and. 54.269 
Calendula and. 56 
Callistephus and. 52 
Campanula and, 58 
carrot and. 60 
celery and. 64 
Chaenomeles and. 65 
cherry and.62 
chickadees and. 2 
Chrysanthemum and. 70. I l 
citrus and. 23 
citrus oils for. 470.421 
Coreopsis and, 26 
corn and. 78.428 
Cosmos and. 82 
Cotoneaster and. 82 
Crocus and.83 
cucumber and. &L85 
currant and. 86 
Dahlia and. 88 
Delphinium and. 88 
Deutzia and. 89 
dextrin for. 484
Dianthus and. 90 
diatomaceous earth for.
421
Digitalis and, 21 
as disease carriers. 362 
eggplant and. 23 
Euonymus and. 24 
Euphorbia and. 25 
Fagus and. 97 
filbert and, 28 
floating row covers for. 443 
garlic oil for. 423 
Geranium and. 104 
Gladiolus and. 105-6 
gooseberry and, 108 
Hamarneh's and. 113 
Hedera and. LL4 
Helianthus and. 114 
herbal tea sprays for. 424 
herbs and. L12 
Hibiscus and. 118 
houseplants and. L2Q 
Hydrangea and. 121 
Impatiens and. 124 
insecticides and, 452 
Juniperus and. L2K 
Lagerstroemia and. 131 
Lathyrus and. 132 
lettuce and. L38 
Ligustrum and. 140 
Lilium and. L42 
Liriodendron and. 143 
Lobelia and. 144 
Lonicera and. 145 
Lupinus and. L4&
Mahonia and, L42 
melon and. L4iL_269 
mulches for. 444 
Narcissus and. 153 
neem for. 422 
Nicotiana and. 153 
onion and. 155.156 
Papaver and. 160 
parsley and. 160 
pea and. 162 
peach and, 269.412 
Pelargonium and. 122 
pepper and.L24. 
pepper dusts and. 426 
perennials and, 127 
Petunia and. L22

INDEX 
■ 
501
Philadelphus and, 179 
plum and. 182 
Populus and. 182 
potato and, L88r89 
predators of. IL  62 (see also 
Aphid midges) 
pruning and, 411.432 
Pyracantha and, 192 
pyrethrin for. 480 
quassia for. 481 
raspberry and. 20Q 
Rosa and. 204,205 
Salix and. 209 
Sedum and. 210 
soap sprays for. 483.484 
Sorbus and. 211 
spinach and. 212 
Spiraea and. 211 
squash and, 215 
sticky board traps for, 438 
superior oils for. 429 
Tilia and. 222 
tomato and, 230 
tomato-leaf spray for. 485 
traps for. 434.438.440 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 235-36. 
232
Tropaeolum and. 240.440 
Tulipa and. 51.242 
Ulmus and. 245 
vegetables and. 246 
Verbena and. 248 
Viburnum and, 248-49 
Viola and. 250 
viruses carried by, 352 
walnut and. 251 
water sprays for. 433 
water traps for. 440 
Yucca and. 252 
Aphytis melinus. citrus and, 23 
Apis mellifera. See Honeybees 
Apium graveolens var. du Ice. See 
Celery
Apple. 21-26. See also Malus
apple scab symptoms on. 371,
381
bagging for. M l 
cedar-apple rust symptoms on. 
323
codling moths and. 262 
cold storage of. 3fi2
culture. 21-22
fire blight symptoms on. 395 
fruit problems of. 22,23,
24-25 
fungicides and, 369 
leaf and branch problems of. 23,
25
leaf scorch damage on. 322 
pollination of cultivars, 101 
powdery mildew and. 349.387 
pruning. 101 
trunk bands for, 446 
viruses and. 151 
whole plant problems of. 23,
26
Apple aphids, woolly. 26ft 
Apple maggots. 22.23* 220.220 
traps for. 429* 434 
Apple sawflies. European, sticky board 
traps for. 439 
Apple scab
apple and. 2121,25,364.368 
fruit symptoms, 387.382 
leaf symptoms. 371-72.371 
sulfur for, 485 
Apple tree. See Malus 
Appletree borers. See Ratheaded 
appletree borers: Roundheaded 
appletree borers 
Apricot. 26-27
pollination of, iOi 
problems of. 26-27 
Aquilegia. 22 
Arabis, 27-28 
Arborvitae. See Thuja 
Archips argyrospila. See Fruittree 
leafrollers 
Arctiidae. See Woollybears 
Armillaria root rot. 403.403 
Armored scales, 320,320 
Army cutworms, 286 
Armyworms. 270-71,22Q
beet (see Beet armyworms) 
corn and.7a
fall. 79,170
floating row covers for, 443 
growth regulators for. 423 
lawns and. 114 
nematodes and. 452 
tillage and, 42& 
viral pathogens for, 461
Artemisia. 28
as pesticide. 424 
problems of, 28 
Artemisia abrotanum. 419 
Artemisia absinthium, 28.419 
Artemisia dracunculus. 28 
Artemisia schmidliana. 28 
Artogeia (= Pieris/ rapae. See Imported 
cabbageworms 
Ash. See Fraxinus
mountain (see Sorbus) 
white (see Fraxinus americana) 
Ash flower gall mites. 99 
Asparagus, 28-30
crop rotation and. 4LB 
culture. 28-29 
leaf problems of, 30 
salt and. 483 
spear problems of. 29=30 
Asparagus aphids. 30 
Asparagus beetles. 221.221 
asparagus and. 29 
floating row covers for. 443 
spotted. 221 
Asparagus fern caterpillars. 29. See 
also Beet armyworms 
Asparagus miners. 29 
Assassin bugs. 7 .177.258.272.273,
44k
Aster. 30
Aster, China. See Callistephus 
Aster leafhoppers. Coreopsis and.
26
Aster yellows
annuals and. 19 
Calendula and. 52 
Callistephus and. 52 
carrot and. &L 61 
Centaurea and. 65 
Cosmos and. 82 
Gypsophila and. I l l  
lettuce and, 138 
sage and. 208 
Tagetes and. 224 
Astilbe, 11
Athelia bambacina. apple and. 24 
Attractant crops. 415 
Australian lady beetles. See Mealybug 
destroyers 
Autocidal resistance. 415 
Avermectins. 466-67.424

502 
■ 
INDEX
Avocado, 3 U 2
cold storage of. 362 
problems of. 3JL32 
Avocado caterpillars. 31-32 
A za d ira c h ta  indica. 477
Azadirachtin. 477-78 
Azalea. See Rhododendron 
Azalea leaf gall. 202
B
Baby's breath. See Gypsophila 
paniculata
creeping (see Gypsophila repens» 
Bachelor's button. See Centaurea 
Bacillus lentimorbwi. 460 
Bacillus popilliae.
Bacillus thuringiensis (BT>. 239, 447.
m=t&
Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis 
(BTI (. 460.424 
Bacillus thuringiensis var. kurstaki 
I BTK 1.459.460 
Bacillus thuringiensis var. san diego
I 
BTSD*. 460 
Bacteria. 348-50. See also specific 
types 
control of. 35il 
nature of, 34&49. 
as pathogens. 340.344.345 
prevention of disease from, iSQ 
spread of - 350 
symptoms of. 349-50 
wet soil and. 362 
Bacterial blight
bean and. 34,35-36.37 
carrot and. 61 
Papaver and. liil 
pear and.364 
Salix and, 209 
Syringa and. 223.
Bacterial canker. 35Q 
apricot and. 22 
cherry and. 6b 
peach and. 165. 162 
plum and. 182 
tomato and. 229,231.212 
Bacterial disease, sweet potato and. 
222
Bacterial leaf spot. 350 
apricot and. 26 
bordeaux mix for. 467 
copper for. 421 
Hedera and. L14 
peach and. 165.166, 162 
plum and. L&6
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 232 
Bacterial ring rot. potato and. 189. lfil 
Bacterial rot
Aquilegia and, 22 
Dianthus and, 90 
Hyacinthus and. 121 
I.ilium and, 142 
potato and. 191-92 
vegetables and. 246 
Bacterial soft rot. 350.401-2 
Iris and. 125* 12itZZ 
pepper and.L26 
potato and. 401 
Bacterial speck, tomato and. 2 H . 232 
Bacterial spot. 322
pepper a n d .174.125 
tomato and. 211.232 
Zinnia and. 372 
Bacterial wetwood, 393.393 
Bacterial wilt. 349.350.384 
bordeaux mix for, 462 
corn and.3,28 
Cosmos and, 82 
cucumber and. 85.384 
Hydrangea and, 122 
melon and. 148,130 
physical controls for. 4211 
squash and. 214,215 
tomato and. 230=31 
Tropaeolum and, 24Q 
Bacteriophages. 368 
Baculoviruscs.461 
Bagging fruit. 441 
Bagworms. 272.222 
Abies and. 12 
Aesculus and. 14 
Gleditsia and. U12 
Juniperus and. 128.128 
Liquidambar and. 143 
Picea and. 182 
Pin us and. L85 
pruning and. 432 
Thuja and, 225
Tilia and. 222
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 236 
Tsuga and. 241 
Baits, traps, and lures. 434-40 
Bait traps. 434-35 
Baking soda sprays. 369.463.467 
Baldfaced hornets, hover flies distin­
guished from. 261 
Balsam. See Impatiens
garden (see Impatiens halsamina) 
Balsam twig aphids. Abies and. 12 
Baltimore orioles, as beneficial 
predators, 2 
Banana, cold storage of, 362 
Barberry. See Berberis
common {see Berberis vulgaris) 
Barberry aphids. Mahonia and. 142 
Barberry scale. Berberis and. 41 
Barberry webworms. Berberis and. 41 
Barberry wilt. Berberis and, 11 
Barriers. 429. 440-46 
for animals. 4Q8*4Q9 
antitranspirants. M l 
for ants. 440-41 
bagging fruit. M) 
copper strips. M l 
for crawling pests. 442 
cutworm collars. 442 
floating row covers. 442-43 
mulches. 443-44 
painting. 4M
rigid plant and row covers. 444-4 5 
seedling protectors. 443 
shade cloths. 445 
trunk bands. 445-46 
Basal ro\. Narcissus and. 153 
Basil. 32
problems of. 32 
as repellent crop. 2 
Bats. 453 
Bean.33=32
anthracnose symptoms on. 386 
crop rotation and. 418 
culture. 33
cutworm collars and. 442 
flower and pod problems of.
36-37
green, as trap crop. 440 
leaf problems of. 33* Ms 35-36 
lima. M i 35* 32

INDEX 
■ 
503
mosaic virus symptoms on, 403 
nitrogen-fixing nodules on. 400. 
340
shell, resistance of. 414 
soap sprays and, 4&3 
whole plant problems of. 33 
Bean aphids, 35.269 
Bean leaf beetles. M. M i 
Bean mosaic. 34» i l ,  32. 353.403 
Bean weevils. 37.273.273 
Beating trays. 433 
Beau venu bassiana. 4fil 
Bee balm. See Monarda 
Beech. See Fagus 
Bees. Rosa and. 206 
Beet. 37-39
crop rotation and. 418 
culture. 32
leaf problems of. 37-38 
root problems of. 3&-.19 
seed sterilization for. 423 
Beet armyworms. 22Q 
beet and.38 
tomato and. H i 
Beet leafhoppers. 302
bcel and .Sh
tomato and. 3 
Beetle grubs, moles and. 409 
Beetles
Alcea and. 16
asparagus and I see Asparagus 
beetles)
bean and (see Bean leaf beetles: 
Mexican bean beetles) 
blister (see Blister beetles) 
carrion. 258 
carrot and. 279.279 
citrus and. 73
Colorado potato (see Colorado 
potato beetles) 
corn and. 22, 22
cucumber (see Cucumber beetles! 
dung,25fi
false hellebore for. 422 
flea (see Rea beetles)
Fuller rose (se* Fuller rose beetles) 
Gladiolus and. 11)6 
ground (see Ground beetles) 
Japanese (see Japanese beetles) 
June (see June beetles)
Juniperus and. 122 
lady (see Lady beetles) 
lawns and. L3S 
leaf (see Leaf beetles)
May. 222.22ft
milky disease spores for, 460=61 
Petunia and. 129 
Pinus and. 1M 
raspberry and. 198-99 
Rosa and, 206 
rove (see Rove beetles) 
scale predatory, buying and 
releasing, 456 
soldier [see Soldier beetles) 
sweet potato and. 221 
tiger (see Tiger beetles)
Ulmus and I see Elm bark beetles: 
Elm leaf beetles)
Begonia. 39-41 
culture. 39-40 
problems of.40-.41 
tuberous-rooted. 39-40 
wax.32o 40 
Bellflower. See Campanula
peach-leaved (see Campanula 
persicifuUa)
Serbian (see Campanula 
pose harsky ana)
Beneficial animals and insects. 7-8.
258.453-59 
attracting and conserving, 258-59.
447. 
450-52
buying and releasing. 452.453. 
454=56.
encouraging, 447,448-50, 450-52 
environmental considerations.
451-52 
food for. 447.450-51 
important native, 448-50 
insecticides and. 451=52 
organically acceptable sprays and.
463.464 
shelter for. 451 
water for. 451 
Beneficial microorganisms. 459-62 
Berberis, 41 
Berberis vulgaris. 41 
Bergenia. 42 
Bergenia cordifolia. 42 
Bergenia crassifolia. 42
Berries. See Blackberry: Blueberry: 
Currant: Gooseberry: Raspberry: 
Strawberry 
pruning and thinning. 103 
Beta vulgaris
Cicla group (see Chard)
Crassa group (see Beet)
Betula. 42-43
problems of. 42-43 
root rot symptoms of. 401 
Betula nigra. 42 
Betula pendula. 42 
Bigeyed bugs, 273.273 
as beneficials. 134,448 
chinch bugs distinguished from, 
26J
Big vein, lettuce and. US 
Billbugs
corn and. 78-79 
lawns and. 134 
nematodes and. 452 
Binab-T. 462
Biological controls. 259,262,407.
beneficial animals and insects 
(see Bencficial animals and 
insects)
beneficial microorganisms. 459=62 
biological balance. 442-52 
for disease. 368=69 
natural predators. 2=8 
Birch. See Betula
European white (see Betula 
pendula) 
river (see Betula nigra)
Birch aphids. 43 
Birch borers, bronze. 42 
Birch leafminers. 42*43, lift 
Birch skeletonizers, 43 
Birds. 402
Anemone and, 18 
attracting. 442 
avocado and, 31
as beneficials. L  & 134.453.452
blueberry and. 46
cherry and. 69
com and. 22
grape and. 110=1 L
shade cloths and. 445
strawberry and. 212

504 
■ 
INDEX
Bird's eye rot. See Anthracnose 
Biller rot. apple and. 21 
Bittersweet. See Ceiasirus 
Bitterwood. See Quassia a mam 
Blackberry. 43-44
problems of. 43-44
rust symptoms on. 325
sulfur dioxide injury damage on.
322
Black blister beetles. See Blister 
beetles, black 
Black cherry aphids, (il 
Black cutworms. 286 
Black-eyed Susan. See Rudbeckia 
hiria 
Blackflies
BTI for. 460 
methoprene for. 423 
Black knot. 328. 
cherry and. 
control of. 364 
plum and. IS". 398 
Black leg
cabbage and. t, 53. 55 
potato and, 189-90 
Blackline. walnut and. 251 
Black root rot
radish and. 126 
strawberry and. 218. 219.360 
Black rot. M b'.M i 
apple and. 23.21 
cabbage and. 
53. 55
copper for. 421 
cucumber and. 86 
grape and. 109. 110. 111. 389 
melon and. 150 
sweet potato and. 221 
turnip and. 243 
Black scale. 32J 
citrus and. 23 
Black spot. 322
baking soda sprays for. 462 
bordeaux mix for. 462 
Rosa and (see Rose black spot) 
soap sprays for. 483 
sulfur for. 485 
Black vine weevils. 274. 274 
BTSD for. 460 
nematodes and. 452 
Rhododendron and. 200. 201.
202
Taxus and. 224 
Wisteria and, 252 
Blazing-star. See Liatris 
Bleach. as disinfectant. 462 
Bleeding heart. See Dicentra
common (see Dicennv spectabilis) 
native fringed (see Dicentra 
eximia)
Bleeding necrosis. Liquidambar and.
U3
Blight. M i  346dLZ
Alternaria (see Alternaria blight* 
bacterial (see Bacterial blight) 
Botrytis (see Botrytis blight I 
Camellia and. 
386
carrot and. 61 
chestnut and.69,369 
copper for. 421 
com leaf. 28 
cottony. L36 
definition of,34ii 
early (stv Alternaria blight) 
eggplant and. 23 
filbert and.!28 
fire (see Fire blight) 
fungal (see Fungal blight I 
Juniperus and (see Juniper blight) 
late (see Late blight) 
lawns and. L3fi 
leaf (see Leaf blight) 
lime-sulfur for. 422 
melon and. 148. L50 
okra and. L54. 
onion leaf. I5fc 
pea and. 163 
pear a n d .120 
Pinus and. 184 
potato and. 341.368 
raspberry and. 198.393.323 
Rhododendron and. 201. 202.363 
Taxus and. 224. 225 
twig 
Twig blight) 
walnut and. 230-51 
Blissus leucopterus. See Chinch bugs 
Blister beetles. 274-75.224 
black. 224
bulbs and. SO 
perennials and. 126 
eggplant and. 23 
margined. 224 
potato and, 12Q
striped. 274.422 
Zinnia and. 253 
Blossom end rot. 382 
pepper a n d .175-76 
tomato and. 229.232-33.387 
Blossoms, pinching of. 4 
Blotch
Aesculus and, L4. 
apple and. 25 
onion and. 157 
Bluebells. See Mertensia
Virginia (iff Mertensia virginica) 
Blueberry. 45z42 
culture. 45
flower and fruit problems of, 
45=46 
highbush. 45.46 
leaf and branch problems of.
46=42 
lowbush. 45 
rabbiteye.45.46 
Blueberry cane canker. 46 
Blueberry maggots. 45 
Bluestone.471
Boisea trivittata. See Boxelder bugs 
Boll weevils. BTSD for. 4£41 
Bollworms. cotton. 461 
Bombus. See Bumblebees 
Bordeaux mix. 341.357.369.467 
Borers
.4r«?rand. Li
apple and (see Ratheaded apple­
tree borers; Roundheaded 
appletree borers)
Betula and. 42
blackberry and. 44
chestnut and. 20
Clematis and. 24
corn and (see Com borers)
Cornus and (see Dogwood borers)
Cotoneaster and. 83
currant. 86.452
Dahlia and. 87
Delphinium and. 89
Fagusand.96
flatheaded (see Ratheaded apple­
tree borers; Flatheaded borers) 
Fraxinus and. 99 
fruit. 22L 221 
Gleditsia and, 102 
Iris and Isee Iris borers)

INDEX 
■ 
505
nematodes and. 458 
pcachtree (see Peachtree borers: 
Peach twig borers)
Picea and. 102 
Pinus and. 185 
Populus and, L81 
raspberry and. 197.199-M l 
Rhododendron and (see Rhodo­
dendron borers)
Rosa and.206 
SalLx and. 208
shothole (see Shothole borers) 
Sorbus and. 211 
squash vine {see Squash vine 
borers! 
stalk (see Stalk borers) 
strawberry- and. 219-20 
Syringa and, 222 
Thuja and. 226 
Tilia and. 222
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 238 
Tsuga and.24J 
Ulmus and. 245 
Boric acid.462z68 
Boron deficiency 
beet and. 38 
cabbage and. 55 
cauliflower and. 62 
cclery and. 64 
Boston ivy See Parthenocissus 
Botanical names, 416,487-88 
Botanical pesticides. 468. See also 
specific types 
Bothynus <—Ligvrus) gibbosus. See 
Carrot beetles 
Botrytis blight
blueberry and. 46 
compost tea and. 422 
Dahlia and. &&
flower discoloration from. 385 
Gladiolus and. 1116 
houseplants and. 120 
Hydrangea and, 122 
on leaves. 323 
Lilium and. 142 
Paeonia and. 139.373 
Petunia and. L2ii 
Rosa and. 207.385 
Tageies and. 224 
Tulipa and. 242 
Botrytis bunch rot. grape and. 110
Botrytis fruit rot. 382 
strawberry and. 389 
Botrytis gray mold. Begonia and. 40 
Bottom rot. lettuce and. 139 
Boxelder bugs. 275. 275 
Acer and. Ll 
Boxwood. See Buxus 
Boxwood leafminers. i l  
Boxwood psy llids. 51 
Braconid wasps. 273-76.275,41£ 
Brambles. See also Blackberry : 
Raspberry 
potato and. 188 
Brussica oleracea
Acephala group (see Collard; 
Kale)
Botrytis group (see Broccoli;
Cauliflower)
Capitata group (see Cabbage I 
Gemmifera group {see Brussels 
sprouts)
Gongylodes group {see Kohlrabi) 
Brussica rapa. Rapifera group. See 
Turnip
Bristly rose slug. Rosa and. 205 
Broccoli. 42
beneficial insects and. 259 
BT and. 459
cabbageworm predators for. 8 
problems of. 41 
seedling protectors and. 445 
seed sterilization for. 423 
timed planting and. 422 
trap crops and. 4:10 
Bronze birch borers. 42 
Brooklime. See Veronica 
Browallia. 42
Brown canker, soap sprays for. 483 
Brown garden snail. 322.458 
Brown patch, lawns and. 135 
Brown rot
almond tree and. 12
apricot and.26
cherry and. 66-67.67,68.386.
citrus and. 72-73
fruit symptoms. 390
leaf symptoms. 386
lime-sulfur for. 426
peach and. 165,. 166.167.39Q
plum and, 1 8 6.390
sulfur for. 485
Brown scale, citrus and. 23 
Brown soft scale. 324 
Brown spot.celery and. 64 
Brown stink bugs. 322
spined soldier bugs distinguished 
from. 260 
Brussels sprouts. 48 
problems of. 48 
seed sterilization for. 423 
BT. See Bacillus thuringiensis 
BTI. 460.474 
BTK. 459.460 
BTSD. 460
Buckthorns. See Rhamnus. grape and 
Buckwheat, beneficials attracted by.
451
Bud blight. Rhododendron and. 363
Buddleia. 48
Buddleia davidii. 48
Bud mites, filbert and. 98
Bud moths. Ilex and. 123
Budworms
spruce (see Spruce budworms) 
tobacco. 461 
Verbena and. 248 
Buffalo treehoppers. 276.226 
Bugbane. See Cimicifuga
stinking (jc* Cimicifuga foetida) 
Bug juice. 468.420 
Bugieweed. See Ajuga
common (see Ajuga rep tans) 
Bulb flies
Narcissus and. 49, 153 
onion and. lifc 
Bulb mites. 50
Crocus and. 83-84 
Gladiolus and. 106 
Hyacinthus and, 121 
Lilium and. 142 
Tulipa and. 242 
Bulb nematodes
Hyacinthus and. 121
Narcissus and. 153 
Phlox and. 180 
Bulb rot. 49
onion and. 136 
Bulbs. 48^51
buying healthy. 48-49.49 
problems of. 30-31 
Bumblebees, 276.276 
Burdock borers. Delphinium and. 89

506 
■ 
INDEX
Butterfly bush. See Buddleia davidii 
Buxus. 51-52
Cabbage. 52-56 
birds and. 8
Chinese, soap sprays and. 483 
club root and, 54,346.360.399 
companion planting and. 412 
compost or manure for. 418 
crop rotation and. 6. 413-16.418 
culture. 32.34 
cutworm collars and. 442 
mulches and. 444 
problems of. 53^ 34-36 
seedling protectors and. 445 
seed sterilization for. 423 
timed planting and. 422 
trap crops and.44Q 
Cabbage aphids. 269.
Cabbage butterflies, viral pathogens 
for. 461-62 
Cabbage loopers. 277. 277 
BTK for. 459 
bug juice for, 420 
cabbage and.53,56 
flour for. 484 
pheromone traps for. 437 
py rethrin for. 480 
tomato and. 231 
viral pathogens for. 461 
Cabbage maggots. 277-78.277 
cabbage and. 53* 54 
diatomaceous earth for. 422 
floating row covers for. 443 
nematodes and. 437 
radish and. 195 
timed planting and. 422 
turnip and. 243 
Cabbage root flies. See also Cabbage 
maggots 
seedling protectors for. 445 
sticky board traps for, 438 
water traps for. 440 
Cabbageworms 
BT and. 452 
flour for. 484 
imported (see Imported 
cabbageworms)
mustard and. 440 
tansy sprays for. 474 
Cacopsylla pyricola. See Pear 
psyllas 
Calcium deficiency 
bean and. 34,35 
beet and.38 
cabbage and.55 
celery and. 64 
pepper and. 173-76 
potato and. 120 
tomato and. IV). 232-33 
Calendula. 36-37 
California red scale. 32Q 
citrus and, 23 
Caliroa cerasi. See Pear sawflies 
Callistephus. 52 
Camellia. 37-38
blight of. 58. 3&l  386 
problems of. $8 
Campanula. 58-39 
Campanula carpatica. £8 
Campanula persicifolia. 58 
Campanula poseharskyana. £8 
C an d y tu ft. See Iberis
evergreen 
Iberis sempervinns) 
rock (see Iberis saxatilis)
Cane gallmakcrs. grape and. 109,112 
Cane girdlers. grape and. 112 
Canker. 343.350 
Acer and. 13 
Aesculus and. 14 
bacterial (see Bacterial canker) 
Betula and. 43 
blueberry and. 46 
bnrwn. soap sprays for. 483 
Cedrus and. 63 
Cornusand.81
Cytospora I see Cytospora canker) 
Fagus and. 96 
Fruxinu.% and. 99 
fungal (see Fungal canker) 
Fusicoccum. 46 
Gleditsia and. LQ2 
Hedera and. LL4 
Ilex and. 123 
Larix and. 132 
Leucostoma (see Cytospora 
canker)
Lonicera and. 145 
Magnolia and. 142
Picea and. 1&2 
Pinus and. 185 
Platanus and. 186 
Pop ulus and. L82 
Quercus and. 124 
Salix and. 209 
Sorbus and. 210 
Tilia and. 222
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 238 
Tsuga and. 241 
Ulmus and. 245 
Valsa (see Cytospora canker) 
Vinca and. 249 
Canker stain. Platanus and. 185 
Cankerworms. 278.278 
Betula and. 42=43 
chestnut and. 62 
Fagus and. 26 
Ulmus and. 244, 243 
Canna. 59
Canna X generalis. 52 
Cantaloupe. 59
Cantharidae. See Soldier beetles 
Capsaicin dusts. 426 
Capsicum annuum var. annuum. See 
Pepper
Carabidac. Sec Ground beetles 
Caraway, as attractant crop, 450 
Cardinal flower. See Lobelia cardinalis 
Carnation. See Dianthus 
Carnivorous insects. 258 
Carpentcrworms. nematodes and. 452 
Carpinus. 39-60
Carrion beetles, as scavengers. 238 
Carrot. 60-62
as attractant crop, 412*450 
as bait crop. 4.T3 
crop rotation and. 418 
culture. 60
leaf problems of. 60-61 
root problems of. 61db2 
seed sterilization for. 423 
soap sprays and. 484 
Carrol beetles. 61. 279.279 
Carrot rust flics. 279.222 
carrot and. 61 
floating row covers for. 443 
sticky board traps for. 438 
Carrot weevils. 280.280 
carrot and. 61 
parsley and. 160

INDEX 
■ 
507
Carya illinoinensis. See Pecan 
Casebearers
Larix and. 132 
pecan nut, LZl 
Castanea. See Chestnut 
Castanea crenata. See Chestnut.
Japanese 
Castanea Jen tala. Se? Chestnut.
American 
Castanea mollissima. See Chestnut.
Chinese 
Caterpillars 
v4cerand, LI 
asparagus and, 2d 
avocado and. 31-32 
barriers for. 442 
bean and. 32 
BTK and. 459 
cabbage and. >5-56 
celery and. 64 
chestnut and. 69 
citrus oils for. 411 
com and. 29 
diatomaceous earth for.
42J
Eastern tent. 330 
false hellebore for. 422 
Fraxinus and. 99 
Gleditsia and. LQ2 
Hama metis and. I l l  
handpicking. 430 
Helianthus and. L14 
lettuce and. 140 
Liqu.dambar and. L43 
okra and. L55 
parsley and. 160 
pea and. L63 
pepper a n d .125 
Petunia and. L29 
Pinus and. 185 
Populus and. 182 
quassia for. 481 
Quercus and. 193 
rhubarb and. 203 
Rosa and.202 
Salix and. 20b 
saltmarsh. 336 
spinach and. 2Jl2 
Spiraea and. 213 
sweet potato and. 221 
Syringa and. 223
tent 1see Tent caterpillars* 
Tilia and. 222 
tomato and, 211.233 
traps for. 434
on trees, shrubs, and vines.
236
use of term. 252 
vegetables and. 242 
velvetbean.461 
Wisteria and. 252 
Cat-facing. 232.328 
Catnip
as attractant crop, 450 
as pesticide. 424 
as repellent crop. 419 
Cats, kiwi and. 130 
Cattle flies, methoprene for.
423
Cauliflower, 62-63
cabbageworm predators on. 
8
problems of. 62=63 
seedling protectors and. 445 
seed sterilization for. 423 
Cavity spot, carrot and, 61=62 
Cedar. See Cedrus
Eastern red (see Juniperus 
virginiana) 
red [see Juniperus) 
Cedar-apple rust
apple and. 23.24,25,
321
Juniperus and. 128.398 
leaf symptoms. 323 
pruning and. 432 
stem symptoms, 398 
Cedar bark beetles, 129 
Cedar-hawthorn rust, 128 
Cedar-quince rust, 128 
Cedrus. 63 
Celastrus. 63 
Celery. 63=64
problems of, 64 
seed sterilization for. 423 
soap sprays and. 484 
Celery leaftiers. pyrethrin for.
480 
Celosia. 64=65 
Centaurea. 65 
Centipedes. 280-81.280 
Cemtitis capitata. See Fruit flies
Cercospora leaf spot 
beet and,38 
carrot and, 61 
pepper and, 124 
Chaenomeles. 65 
Chafers
lawns and, L25 
masked, nematodes and,
452
Rosa and [see Rose chafers* 
Chard, 66 
Cherry. 66-69
brown rot symptoms on. 386 
cherry leaf spot symptoms on, 
313 
culture. 66
fruit problems of. 66-67.62 
fungi and, 342
leaf and branch problems of.
67-69.67 
pollination of. 101 
pruning, 103 
sour, 66, UU 
sweet, 66,101
whole plant problems of. 69 
Cherry aphids, black, 62 
Cherry fruit flies, 66,62 
traps for. 435.432 
Cherry fruitworms. blueberry and, 
45
Cherry laurel, winter injury damage 
o n .380
Cherry leaf spot. 67* 68.373-74.
323
Chervil, as trap crop. 440 
Chestnut. 69-70 
American. 69 
Chinese, 69 
horse (see Aesculus)
Japanese. 69 
problems of. 69=20 
Chestnut blight, 
369 
Chestnut weevils, chestnut and. 20 
Chickadees, as beneficial predators. 
1
Chickens, as beneficial predators. 
453
Chiggers. soap sprays for. 4&3 
Chilocorus nigritus. buying and 
releasing. iSh 
China aster. See Callistephus

508 
■ 
INDEX
Chinaberry tree, 422 
Chinch bugs. 281.2&1
bigeyed bugs distinguished from.
261
lawns and. 133. 134-35>
(raps for. 435-36 
Chitin. 470 
Chives. 20
common. 20 
garlic. 2Q 
as pesticide. 424 
problems of, 20 
Chlorosis. Rhododendron and. 202 
Choanephora blight, okra and. 154 
Choristoneura fumiferana. See Spruce 
budworms 
Choristoneura rosaceana. See 
Obliquebanded leafrollers 
Chry santhemum. 70-71
foliar nematode symptoms on. 
326
problems of. 7t>-?l 
Chrysanthemum coccineum. 480 
Chrysanthemum f — Tanacetum) 
cinerariifolium. 4&Q
Chrysobothris femomta. See Flat- 
headed appletree borers 
Chrysomelidae. See Rea beetles 
Chrysoperla (—Chrysopa). See 
Lacewings 
Cicadellidae. See Leafhoppers 
Cicindelidae. See Tiger beetles 
Cimicifuga. 11 
Cimicifuga foetida. 21 
Citrullus lanatus. See Watermelon 
Citrus. 72-73
fruit problems of. 22
leaf and branch problems of.
7?-73 
oil sprays and. 423 
sulfur and. M i 
Citrus mealybugs. 21, 3fi4 
Citrus mites. 72.307 
Citrus oils, as pesticides. 470-71.
474
Citrus scab, 22 
Citrus whiteflies, 135 
ClandoSan.420 
Cleanliness. See Sanitation 
Clematis. 24 
Clematis borers. 24
Clematis wilt. 24 
Click beetles 
corn and, 22 
Gladiolus and. 106 
Clover, 416
as attractant crop, 451 
white, as pesticide. 4Z4 
Club root. 343,344,346,323 
acidic soil a n d .^ l  
cabbage and, 24*360- 399.
415-16 
radish and. 125 
Coccidae. See Scale(s). armored: 
Scale(s), soft 
Coccincllidae. See Lady beetles 
Cockroaches, feeding habits of, 257. 
?S H
Cockscomb. See Celosia 
Codling moths. 282.282 
apple and, 2 2 . 4 1 6  
bagging fruit and. 441 
BTK for. 45a
coordinated control of. 262.
263
growth regulators for. 473 
nematodes and. 452 
pear and. 163 
pheromone traps for. 437.
4X0
pyrethrin for, 480 
trunk bands for. 446 
viral pathogens for. 462 
walnut and.250 
Coelomyces. 461 
Colchicum. 74 
Cold injury, 360.362
leaf symptoms, 380-81 
stem symptoms. 336
7axitf and,396 
Cold storage, 362 
Cold temperatures, 356 
Coleus. 24.
Collard.25 
Color, of plants. 4
Colorado potato beetle parasites, buy­
ing and releasing. 4M  
Colorado potato beetles, 283.283 
BTSD for. 460 
bug juice for, 420 
citrus oils for, 421 
eggplant and. S it34
floating row covers for, 441 
fungal pathogen for. 561 
growth regulators for. 423 
handpicking. 430 
neem for, 422 
nematodes and, 457-58 
Petunia and. 123 
potato and. 120 
pyrethrin for, 480 
quassia for. 4&1 
shaking and.413 
tomato and. 231.231 
Columbine. See Aquilegia 
Companion planting. 7 .407.411. 
413=20 
attractant crops, 413 
good neighbors. 4 m -20 
patterns to avoid. 420 
repellent crops, 413 
theory of. 413 
Compost, crop rotation and.416 
Composting
for disease control. 369.425-26.
426-27 
effect on pests. 426 
for insect control. 425-26 
method for. 425-26 
for sanitation. .165.423.424.432 
Compost tea. for fungal diseases. 427. 
421
Coneflower. See Rudbeckia
pale (,*«» Echinacea pallida) 
purple [see Echinacea purpurea) 
Conifer sawflies, 319.313 
Conotrachelus nenuphar. See Plum 
curculios 
Construction damage. 19.4,394 
Controls
biological I see Biological controls) 
cultural (see Cultural controls) 
for disease. 368=63 
for insects (see Insects, controls 
for)
organic sprays and dusts (see 
Organic sprays and dusts) 
physical [see Physical controls) 
stopping animal pests, 408=3 
strategy planning for. 402 
types of. 406-7 
Convallaria. 25 
Convallaria majalis. 25

INDEX 
■ 
509
Convergent lady beetles. 301. 301 
Cooperative Extension Service. 360.
410.413.431.462.479 
Coordinated control. 262.263 
Copper, as pesticide. 421 
Copper-based fungicides. 34ft. 369.
471.472 
Copper deficiency 
carrot and. 62 
pea and. 163 
Copper strips. 441 
Copper sulfate. 421 
Coral bells. See Heuchera sanguined 
Coreopsis. 73-76 
Coreopsis grandiflora. 25 
Cork, internal, sweet potato and. 220, 
221 
Corn. 76-80
compost or manure for. 418 
corn smut symptoms on. 390 
crop rotation and. 6 
culture. 26
ear problems of. 7 7 .79-80 
field (dent). 26 
flint (Indian). 26 
flour. 26
host resistance of. 414
leaf and whole plant problems of.
76-79.77 
ornamental. 26
phosphorus deficiency damage 
on, 322 
popcorn. 26 
site selection and. 3 
sweet. 26 
Corn borers
European (see European corn 
borers)
Southwestern (see Southwestern 
com borers)
Com earworms. 284. 284 
com and. 6 .77,79.414 
mineral oil for. 422 
neem for. 422 
nematodes and. 458 
pepper a n d .175. L26 
pheromone traps for. 432 
tomato-leaf spray for. 485 
Cornflower. See Centaurea 
Corn leaf blight, com and. 28 
Com root aphids, tillage and. 428
Com rootworms 
com and. 22 
nematodes and. 452 
Northern (see Northern com 
rootworms)
Southern (see Southern com 
rootworms) 
spotted. 285.285 
Com smut. 80,390,390 
Com spurry. as attractant crop.
|451 
Cornus. 80-81
anthracnose symptoms on.
321 
culture. 80 
problems of. 80-81 
Cornus florida. 3.80.81 
Cornus kousa. 80 
Cornus mas. 8Q 
Corylus americana. See filbert 
Corylus avellana. See filbert 
Cosmos. 81.-.82 
Cotoneaster. 82-8.1 
Cotoneaster webworms. 82 
Cotton bollworms. viral pathogens for.
461
Cotton root rot
acidic soil and, 363 
pecan and. 122 
Cottonwood, lightning damage on. 
392
Cottony blight, lawns and. L36 
Cottony cushion scale. 321 
citrus and. 23 
Cottony maple scale, l i  321 
Crab apple. See Malus 
Cranberry fruitworms. blueberry and. 
45
Cranesbill. See Geranium 
Crape myrtle. See Lagerstroemia 
Crataegus. 83 
Crickets, mole 
lawns and, 135 
nematodes and. 45Z 
Crickets, protozoan pathogen for.
462
Crioceris asparagi. See Asparagus 
beetles
Crioceris duodecimpunctata. See 
Asparagus beetles, spotted 
Crocus. 83=84
Crocus
autumn (see Colchicum) 
showy (see Crocus speciosus) 
Crocus speciosus. 83 
Crop rotation. 6-7.41L 413-19
for disease control. 364. .165-66 
planning. 416.417,41& 
rules for, 418=12 
theory of. 4l5r.l6 
Crop timing. 411.421-22 
Crown gall. 350.399
biological control of. 363 
blackberry and. 44 
Euonymus and. 94,25 
Forsythia and. 99 
fungal antagonist of. 462 
humans as vcctors of. 362 
raspberry' and. 139 
Rosa and.207,399 
Salix and. 209 
Sorbus and. 211 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 238 
Viburnum and. 242 
Crown imperial. See Fritillaria 
imperialis 
Crown rot
asparagus and. 22 
Campanula and. 58-39 
Delphinium and. 89 
herbs and. L12 
Hosta and. LL8rl9 
Iris nod, 126-27 
kiwi a n d ,130 
Paeonia and. 159 
rhubarb an d ,203 
salt for. 483 
vegetables and. 246 
walnut and. 251 
Crumbly berry virus, raspberry and, 
122
Ciyptolaemus montrouzieri. See Mealy­
bug destroyers 
Cucumber, 84-86
bacterial wilt symptoms on. -1X4 
crop rotation and. 418 
culture, 84
fruit problems of. 8.3-86 
leaf and vine problems of. 84-85 
oil sprays and. 422 
powdery mildew pathogen for.
342

510 
■ 
INDEX
Cucumbcr (continued/ 
radishes and. 413 
soap sprays and. 483.484 
squash and.213 
Cucumber beetles. 285.285 
asparagus and. 23 
bait traps for. 435 
bean and. 36 
com and. 28 
cucumbcr and. 84 
melon and. 148.143 
neem for. 422 
pea and. Ili3 
Petunia and. 123 
physical controls for. 423 
radish and. 413 
shaking and. 413 
spotted
Alcea and. lft 
bulbs and. 50 
corn and. 22 
squash and. 214. 215. 216 
sticky board traps for. 438.
433
striped. 285-K6.285 
cucumber and. 364 
sweet potato and. 222 
Cucumbcr mosaic virus. 343*352 
basil and. 32 
control of. 364 
Cucumis melo. See Melon 
Reticulatus group (see 
Cantaloupe)
Cucumis sativus. See Cucumber 
Cucurbita. See Squash 
Cucurbita maxima. 213 
Cucurbita mixta. 213 
Cucurbita moschata. 213 
Cucurbita pepo. 213 
Cucurbits
lilies and, 142 
melons and. 143 
Culicinomyces. 461 
Cultivars. resistant. 410.413.415 
Cultural controls. 259.40b. 410=28 
companion planting 
Com­
panion planting) 
composting (see Composting) 
crop rotation (see Crop rotation) 
for fruit. 1QJL3JLQ2
for growth <see Growth enhancers;
Growth regulators) 
healthy soil. 410 
nutrients in organic fertilizers,
111
resistance. 
4l2r 15 (see also
Cultivars. resistant; Resistant 
plants) 
sanitation <see Sanitation) 
soil cultivation. 3* 5 
soil tillage. 427-28 
timing and placement. 411.421-22 
Cultural problems. 355-58 
diagnosis of. 10 
Curculios
peas and.414 
plum (see Plum curculios) 
rhubarb and. 203 
Rosa an d ,204,206 
shell beans and. 414 
Curled rose sawflies. 205 
Curly top virus. 383 
bean and. 35 
beet and. 3 ^33 
spinach and. 212 
tomato and, 3,381 
Currant. 86
European black. 86 
lime-sulfur spray for, 422 
Pinus and. L83 
problems of. 86 
red. 86 
white. 86 
Currant borers, 86. 452 
Currant fruit flies, 232 
currant and. 86 
goose be rry and. 107-8 
Curran two rms, imported. See Imported 
currantworms 
Cutworm collars, 262.442 
Cutworms, 2 ^ 7 ^ 2 8 6  
annuals and, 20 
army. 286. 
asparagus and. 23 
black. 286 
corn and. 26=22 
floating row covers for. 443 
handpicking, 430 
herbs a n d .116 
lettuce and. 132
nematodes and. 458 
Nicotiana and. 153 
onion and. 155 
pea and. 162 
pepper a n d .173-74 
perennials and, 128 
sweet potato and. 222 
tillage and. 428 
toads and. 2=8 
tomato and. 228 
trunk bands for. 446 
variegated. 286 
vegetables and. 246 
Viola and. 25Q 
Zinnia and. 253 
Cydia pomonella. See Codling moths 
Cynipidae. See Gall wasps 
Cytospora canker. 331.333 
apricot and. 22 
cherry and. 68 
peach and. 167-68.362.321 
plum and, 182
D
Daddy longlegs, 458-59 
Daffodil. See Narcissus 
Dahlia. 87-88 
Daisy
as attractant crop. 419.450 
Michaelmas (see Aster) 
Damage sy mptoms, from insects.
2ft4-67
Damping-off, 343.346,402-3,413 
annuals and. 20 
bean and. 362 
Celosia and. 65 
com and. 362 
fungal antagonist of. 462 
herbs and. 116 
Impatiens and. 124 
lettuce and. 132 
Lobularia and. L45 
onion and. L55 
pea and. 162 
pepper and. 123 
symptoms on seedlings. 402 
timed planting and. 422 
tomato and. 228

INDEX ■ 511
vegetables and. 246 
Zinnia and. 2S.1 
Damsel bugs. 287.282 
as beneficials, 448.
Daphne. Kg
Daucus carota var. sativus. See 
Carrot 
Dayliiy. Sec Hemerocallis 
DE. See Diatomaceous earth 
Decline of trees, shrubs, and vines, 
238=39 
Decollate snails. 458 
DED. See Dutch elm disease 
Deer, 408
apple and. 26 
Lilium and, 143 
Delia antiqua. See Onion maggots 
Delia radicum (—Hylemya hrassicae).
See Cabbage maggots 
Delphinium. 88-89 
Deodar weevils. Cedrus and. 63 
Deutzia. 89
Dextrin, as pesticide. 484 
Diahrotica longicomis. See Northern 
corn rootworms 
Diabrotica undecimpunctata howardi. 
See Cucumber beetles: Southern 
com rc*otworms 
Diagnosis
of disease. 337,339-60 
of plant problems, 9-10 
Diamondback moth caterpillars, cab­
bage and, 56 
Diamondback moths. 287-88.287 
BT and. 460 
BTK for. 459 
Dianthus, 89-90 
Dianthus barbatus, 90 
Dianthus deltoides. 9Q 
Diaphania nitidalis. See Pickleworms 
Diatomaceous earth (DE), 464*465, 
471-72
Diatraea grandiosella. See Southwest­
ern corn borers 
Dicentnx. 90-91 
Dicentru eximia. 91 
Dicentra spectabilis, 9Q 
Dieback
Betula and. 43
Rhododendron and. 201,202
Digitalis. 91 
Digitalis purpurea. 91 
Dill. 92
as attractant crop. 259.450 
as trap crop, 440 
Disease
carriers of. control of. 366-67. 
366
controls for. 368-69 (see also 
Controls) 
definition of, 340 
development of. 342-43.342 
discouraging. 361=63 
effect on plants, 340.342 
environmental conditions and. 
343
handling plants and. 3 
historical aspects of, 341 
identification of, 357.339-60 
infectious (see Infectious diseases) 
nomenclature. 349 
noninfcctious. 355-58 
prevention and control of.
358d69 
resistance (see Resistance) 
site selection and. 2=3 
stopping spread of, 363^62 
symptoms of
guide to, 37Q-4Q3 
primary- vs. secondary. 359 
signs vs.. 320 
Disease cycle. 343-44 
Diseased plants, destroying. 364.412 
Disorders, 353-38 
Dodder. 3M, 353,396-97.392 
Dogwood. See Comus
cornelian cherry [see Comus mas) 
flowering (see Cornus florida) 
kousa (see Comus kousa) 
Dogwood anthracnose. 81.371 
Dogwood borers. 3,80,81 
Dollar spot, lawns and. 133,I35r36 
Double blossom, blackberry and, 44 
Downy leatherwinged soldier beetles.
323
Downy mildew. 345.347.324 
Aster and, 30 
bean and, 34,35.32 
beet and.38 
bordeaux mix and. 341
cabbage and. S3.55 
cauliflower and. 62 
copper for. 421 
cucumber and. 85 
grape and. 108,109.110.111.
324,324 
lettuce and. 139 
melon and. 149 
onion and. 156-57 
pea and, 163 
pruning and. 432 
radish and. L96 
spinach and. 212 
squash and. 214.215 
turnip and. 243 
Veronica and. 248 
Drosophila melanogaster. See Vinegar 
flies 
Drought. 355
Dry rot. Gladiolus and. 106 
Dung beetles, as scavengers. 258 
Dust controls, 464.465,476. See also 
Diatomaecous earth (DE)
Dusty miller. See Senecio
Dutch elm disease (DED), 2 ,243.244.
245.-3fe6..394=25,Jg4 
Dwarf mistletoe. 354
E
Early blight. See Alternaria blight 
Earwigs
barriers for. 442 
feeding habits of. 258 
nematodes and. 452 
rove beetles distinguished from.
260
shaking and. 433 
soap sprays for. 483 
strawberry and. 212 
traps for. 436 
Earworms. See Com earworms 
Eastern filbert blight. 98 
Eastern tent caterpillars. 33ft 
Echinacea. 92 
Echinacea pallida. 92 
Echinacea purpurea. 92 
Edovum puttleri. See Colorado potato 
beetle parasites

512 
■ 
INDEX
Eggplant. 93-94 
culture. 23
cutworm collars and. M2 
disease susceptibility of. 430 
pepper and. L23 
potato and. IM 
problems of. 93-94 
seed sterilization for. 423 
soap sprays and. 4b4 
strawberry and. 2_LSi 
tomato and. 22b 
Elm. See Ulmus
American (see Ulmus americana) 
lacebark (see Ulmusparvifolia) 
Elm bark beetles. 244-43.244. 288.
2 XX. 366
Elm leaf beetles. 24.1.244.244.4b0 
Elm leafminers. 245,319 
Elm phloem necrosis. 3bl 
Elm yellows. 3bl 
Encarsia formosa. See Whitefly 
parasites, buying and releasing 
Entomophthora. 461 
Environmental conditions, disease and,
343
Environmental problems, 333-37 
control of. .156-37.358 
nature of. 355 
prevention of. 356 
symptoms of. .13.5-36 
Epilachna varivestis. See Mexican 
bean beetles 
Epimedium, 94
Equisetum arvense. See Horsetail spray 
Eriophyidae. See Mites, gall: Mites, 
rust
Euonymus. 94.95 
Euphorbia. 94-93 
Euphorbia epiihvmoides. *25 
Euphorbia griffithii. 95 
Euphorbia mvrsinites. 94 
European apple sawflies. sticky board 
traps for. 43*£
European chafers, lawns and. 135 
European corn borers. 289.289 
corn and. 6.77.29 
Dahlia and. &2 
false hellebore for. 422 
pepper a n d .173.126 
ryania for, 4b2 
tillage and.42b
European elm bark beetles. 288 
European pine sawflies. 319 
European red mites. 457 
peach and. 162
F
Fabraea leaf spot, pear and. 120 
Eagus. 96-97
Fairy ring, lawns and. L36 
Fall armyworms. 22ft 
com and. 29 
Pall webworms, 334.334 
False hellebore, as pesticide. 422 
False spirea. See Astilbe 
Fences and barriers, for animals. 408.
409
Fennel, as attractant crop. 239.450 
Fenusa. See Sawflies. leafminer 
Ferns, soap sprays and. 4b3 
Fertility, of soil. 363 
Fertilization. 6 
Fertilizers
for houseplants, 1112 
organic, nutrients in. 4/1 
Feverfew, as pesticide, 424 
Ficus carica. See Fig 
Fig, 97-98
fruit problems of. 92 
leaf and branch problems of. 92 
whole plant problems of. 97-98 
Filbert, 9b
Filbert blight. Eastern. 9b 
Rlbertworms. 98 
Fir. See Abies 
Fire ants. 471. *123 
Fire blight. 395
apple and. 25,325 
bordeaux mix for. 462 
Cotoneaster and. b2 
humans as vectors of, 362 
pear and. 169,170.364.363 
pruning and.432 
Pyracantha and. 192 
Sorbus an d .210 
Spiraea and. 213 
Fi re thorn. See Pyracantha 
Ratheaded appletree borers. 289-90.
289 
Rosa an d .206
Ratheaded borers
painting trees and. 444 
pruning and. 432 
Rea beetles. 290,290 
alcohol sprays for. 465 
ammonia sprays for. 466 
bean and.36 
beet and.3b 
com and. i. 2b 
eggplant and,93 
floating row covers for. M3 
lettuce and. 139-40 
neem for. 422 
pepper and.L23 
Petunia and. 129 
potato and. i  190 
radish and. 440 
repellent crops for. 419 
spinach and. 212 
steelbluc. 290 
sticky board traps for. 439 
striped
cabbage and.53^ 55 
sweet potato and. 222 
sweet potato and. 2 2 1 -2 2  
tillage and. 42b 
tomato and. 231 
Tropaeolum and. 240.440 
vegetables and. 242 
Fleas. 473,4b3 
Ries
blackflies. 460.473 
carrot and (see Carrot rust 
flics!
cattle, methoprene for. 423 
cherry and (see Cherry fruit 
flies) 
citrus oils for. 421 
currant fruit (see Currant fruit 
flies)
false hellebore for. 422 
flower (see Rower flies) 
fruit (see Fruit flies) 
houseflies. 238.261 
hover (see Hover flies) 
Narcissus and. 49* 153 
onion and. 136.43b (see also 
Onion maggots) 
quassia for. 4bl 
syrphid, 450
tachinid (see Tachinid flics)

INDEX ■ 
513
vinegar, 333.331. 
walnut and. 222 
Floating row covers. 442-43 
Rossflower. See Ageratum 
Flour, as pesticide. 484 
Rower blight. Camellia and. 58,386. 
386
Rower flics. 296. 2%  
as beneficials. M l 
Rower gall, 306
Rowe ring quince. See Chaenomeles 
Rowering tobacco. See Nicotiana 
Rower petal blight. Rhododendron 
and. 201.202 
Rowers, discolored. 385-86 
Rower thrips
Hemerocallis and. 115-16 
Paeonia and. 159 
Western. 331 
Ry speck, apple and. 25 
Foliar nematodes. 326
Chry santhemum and. 70-71,
376
Foot rot, rhubarb and, 203 
Forsythia. 98-99 
Four-lined plant bugs, 329 
annuals and. LSI 
Coreopsis and. 26 
daisy and, ft 
Geranium and. 104.
Lonicera and, 145 
perennials and. L28 
Foxglove. See Digitalis
common (see Digitalis purpurea) 
Foxglove aphids, 91 
Fragaria x  ananassa. See Strawberry 
Fraxinus. 92 
Fraxinus americana, 92 
Fritillaria. 99rl00 
Fritillaria imperialis. 29 
Fritillaria meleagris. 99-100
Froghoppers. 325. 325 
Frost damage
fruit symptoms. 390-91 
on honey locust. 32J 
stem symptoms. 321 
strawberry and. 217.390 
Frost pockets, fruit and. 100 
Fruit, 1QQ-1Q3 
bagging, M l 
planting. 101
pollination requirements of, 101 
preventive care for. 103 
problems of. 342 
pruning and training. 101-3.102 
selection of. LQQrlOl 
site selection for. 100-103 
thinning. 103 
Fruit borers. 291.291 
Fruit flies
Drosophila melanogaster, 333. 
333
Mediterranean. 222 
Rhagoletes spp. and Ceratitis 
capitata. 292.222 
Fruit rot
blackberry and.M  
eggplant and. 93 
raspberry and. 192 
Fruit scab, avocado and, 3J 
Fruit, disease symptoms on 
off-color patches, 387-88 
powdery white coating. 388=8.9 
rotted or deformed fruit. 389-91 
spots, 386-8?
Fruittrce leafrollers. 293.223 
Fruit trees
oil sprays for, 428 
painting. 4M 
pruning. 432 
sulfur and. 4&5 
Fruitworms
blueberry and. 45 
gooseberry and. 102 
raspberry and (see Raspberry 
fruitworm beetles; Raspberry 
fruitworms) 
tomato and t see Tomato 
fruitworms)
Fuller rose beetles 
bulbs and. 50 
Camellia and. 5& 
perennials and. L26 
Fungal blight, 346 
celery and. 64 
dill and. 22 
fig and. 92 
herbs and, L12 
Juniperus and. L22 
Picea and, L82 
Salix and. 202 
Syringa and, 223
Thuja and, 226 
Tsuga and. 24.1 
Fungal canker
parsnip and. 161 
Pinus and, I&5 
Rosa an d .206 
Fungal disease, sweet potato and. 222 
Fungal leaf spot. 342 
corn and. 28 
Phlox and. L8Q 
thyme and. 226
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 232 
Veronica and. 248 
Yucca and. 252 
Fungal rot
Aquilegia and. 22 
broccoli and. 42 
Dianthus and. 90 
Hyacinthus and. 121 
Lilium and. 142 
Lobelia and, 1M 
potato and. 188,191-92 
vegetables and. 246 
Fungal wilt. 346
Ageratum and. Li 
Helianthus and. 1L4 
Lobularia and. H5.
Fungi. 346=4£L See also specific 
types
bcncficial, 368.461 
compost tea and. 422 
control of. 342=48 
horsetail spray for, 425 
nature of. 346
as pathogens. 340. 343. 344.345 
prevention of disease from. 342 
signs of. 320 
spread of. 342 
symptoms of. 346=42 
wet soil and, 362 
Fungicides. 347-48.369.472-73 
Fungus-feeding insects. 258 
Fungus gnat larvae, as fungus-feeders,
m
Fungus gnats
aphid midges distinguished from,
260 
BTI for. 460 
methoprene for. 423 
sprouted wheat and. 440 
sticky board traps for. 43&

514 
■ 
INDEX
Fusarium. 344.345.483 
Fusarium basal rot. Narcissus and, 153 
Fusarium blight, lawns and. 136 
Fusarium bulb rot. onion and. LS6 
Fusarium wilt, 384 
asparagus and. 29 
v4.j/i/<>eand,31 
Callistephus and. 52 
eggplant and. 93 
herbs and. L16 
melon and. L5Q 
pea and. 162-63 
pepper and. 124 
sanitation and. 422 
spinach and. 212 
sweet potato and. 220 
tomato and. 229.230.384. 430 
vegetables and. 246 
Fusarium yellows
cabbage and. 53* 54 
celery and, 64 
Gladiolus and. 106 
Fusicoccum cankcr. blueberry and. 46
G
Gall. 293*345,350
crown (see Crown gall) 
flower. 306 
grapevine tomato, ill 
Hamarneh's and. L13 
leaf. 383
Liriodendron and. 144 
maple velvet. 306 
Quercus and. 193.154 
Rhododendron and,383 
Gallmakcrs. grape cane. 109. LL2 
Gall midges. Cornus and. 81 
Gall mites. 306.306 
ash flower. 99 
Gall rusts. Pinus and. US5 
Galltrol-A. 369.462 
Gall wasps. 293.293 
Garden
companion planting in. 419 
management of. 364=62 
Garden centipedes. 280 
Gardenia
iron deficiency damage on. 326 
soap sprays and. 483
Garden mum. See Chrysanthemun, 
Garden webworms. 334.334 
beet and.38 
pruning and. 431.432 
Garlic. 104
crop rotation and. 4JL8 
problems of, L04 
Garlic oil. as pcsticidc. 423 
Gayfeather. See Liatris 
Genetic engineering. 363 
Geocoris. See Bigeyed bugs 
Geolaelaps. See Soil mites, buying 
and releasing 
Geometridae. See Cankerworms 
Geranium. 104
Geranium, garden or zonal. See 
Pelargonium 
Geranium aphids. 104 
Girdlcrs
grape and. LL2 
Rosa an d .206 
Gladiolus. 105-6 
Gladiolus x  hortulanus. 105 
Gleditsia. 102
frost damage on. 391 
problems of, 102 
Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis. 102 
Gliocladium virens. 462 
Gnats, fungus. See Fungus gnats 
Goldenrod. as attractant crop. 451 
Gooseberry. 102=8
fruit problems of. 107-8 
leaf problems of. L08 
lime-sulfur spray for. 422 
Pinus and. L&3 
Gooseberry fruitworms. 102 
Gooseberry mildew. American. 107. 
108
Gophers. Crocus and. 83
Graft incompatibility, of trees, shrubs.
and vines. 239-40 
Grains, legumes and. 41jB 
Granulosis viruses (GV),46J
for codling moth control. 262.
261 
Grape. 108-12
American. LOtL 111.112 
black rot symptoms on. 389 
culture. 108
downy mildew symptoms on. 374 
European-American hybrids. 108
European (wine), 10H, 110.112 
fruit problems of. 108.109.
LLQill 
fungicides and. 369 
holly (see Mahonia) 
leaf and branch problems of. 109. 
i i i - i ?  
muscadine. 108. 111. 112 
powdery mildew symptoms on.
388 
pruning, 103 
sulfur and. 485 
training. LQ3
whole plant problems of, 109.
112
Grape berry moths 
grape and. 109.110 
pheromones for. 480 
Grape cane gallmakers. 109, L12 
Grape cane girdlers. 1L2 
Grape mealybugs. 110 
Grape phylloxeras. 109. LLL 112 
Grape scale. 112 
Grapevine tomato gall. 111 
Grape whiteflies. Llil 
Grapholitha molesta. See Oriental fruit 
moths 
Grasshoppers, 291,294 
false hellebore for. 422 
lawns and, 135 
protozoan pathogen for. 462 
Gray mold
Begonia and. 40 
herbs and. LLZ 
lettuce and. 139 
okra and. 154 
strawberry and. 217.218 
vegetables and. 246-47 
Graywall. tomato and. 212 
Greasy spot, citrus and. 22 
Green bean, as trap crop. 440 
Green lacewings 
for annuals. L8 
food for. 447.450 
Green peach aphids. 269,119 
Green stink bugs 
bean and. 32 
Ground beetles. 294-95.294 
attracting, 451 
as beneficials. 25H.JJ& 
refuges of, 259

INDEX ■ 515
Groundhogs
lettuce and. 140 
Lilium and, 143 
Growing conditions, optimizing, 361-62 
Growth, stunted. 403 
Growth enhancers, 412 
Growth regulators. 412.473,424 
Grubs
beetle, moles and. 409 
pecan weevil, 121 
sod crops and. 418 
tillage and. 428 
use of term, 252 
white (see White grubs)
Gum, sweet (see Liquidambar) 
Gummy stem blight, melon and. 148, 
1 5 ft
GV. See Granulosis viruses 
Gypsophila. 112-13 
Gypsophila paniculata. L12 
Gypsophila repens. 112-13 
Gypsy moths. 29.S. 225 
Betula and. 43 
BTK for. 452 
chc.stnutand.69 
Fagusand. %
Gleditsia and. 102 
manual control of. 430 
neem for. 422 
Picea and. 182 
Quercus and. 193.194 
on trees, shrubs, and vines.
m
trunk bands for. 446 
Tsuga and. 241 
viral pathogens for. 461
H
H am am elis. 113
Handling plants, 3 
Handpicking, 430=11 
Hardiness zones, map of. 4X6 
Harebell. See Campanula
Carpathian (see Campanula 
carpatica)
Harlequin bugs. 322 
cabbage and. 55 
mustard and. 440 
Harvestmen. 458-59
Hawthorn. See Crataegus 
Hazel, witch. See Hamamelis 
Heading cut, 103 
Healthy plants 
buying. 4*4 
care and,3 
feeding. 6 
plan for, 2=6 
selection of. 5=6 
soil for, i  5 
unhealthy plants vs., 4  
Healthy soil.41£
Heat, for disease control. 362 
Hedera. 114
as attractant crop. 451 
dodder o n .392 
problems of. 114 
salt injury damage on. 383 
Heirloom cultivars. 415 
Helianthus. 114 
Helichrysum. 115 
Helicoverpa (—Heliothis) zea. See 
Com earworms 
Heliothis (—Helicoverpa) zea. See 
Com earworms 
Helix aspersa. See Snails, brown garden 
Hellebore, false, as pesticide. 422 
Helleborus. 115 
Helleborus niger, 115 
Helleborus Orientalis. 115 
Hemerocallis. 115-16 
Hemispherical scale. 321 
Hemlock. See Tsuga 
Hemlock loopers 
Abies and. 12 
Thuja and. 226 
Tsuga and. 241 
Hemlock woolly adelgids. 240-41 
Herbal sprays. 463.473-75 
Herbs. 11&-JL2
beneficials attracted by. 450 
leaf problems of, 116-17 
whole plant problems of, 116 
Heterorhabditis heliothidis. 452 
Heuchera. 117-18 
Heuchera americana. 112 
Heuchera micrantha. 117 
Heuchera sanguinea. 112 
Hibiscus. LIS
Hickory shuckworms, pecan and.
121
High temperatures, 356 
Hippodamia convergens. See Lady 
beetles, convergent 
Holly. See Ilex 
Holly grape. See Mahonia 
Hollyhock. See Alcea 
Homemade sprays. 463.425 
Honeybees, 296,2 9 6  
as beneficials, L  258 
organically acceptable sprays and, 
463*464 
Honey locust. See Gleditsia 
Honeysuckle. See Lonicera 
Honeysuckle sawflies. Lonicera and. 
145
Hornbeam. See Carpinus 
Homtails. raspberry, 129=200 
Homworms. 222 
eggplant and, 93 
pepper and. 125
tobacco (see Tobacco homworms) 
tomato and (see Tomato 
homworms)
Horse chestnut. See Aesculus 
Horsetail spray. 475-76 
Horticultural oils. 359.463.464.428=22 
Hosta. 118=12 
Host resistance, 41.4=15 
Hot dusts. 426 
House centipedes. 28Q 
Houseflies, tachinid flies distinguished 
from. 261 
Housefly larvae, as scavengers. 258 
Houseplants, 119-20 
culture. 112=20 
problems of, 120 
Hover flies, 2%. 296
as aphid predators. 62 
baldfaced hornets distinguished 
from. 261 
as beneficials, 44.(J 
Humidity
high, disease and. 362 
for houseplants. 113 
Hyacinthus. 121 
Hydrangea. 121-22 
Hydrangea Icaftiers, 121 
Hylemya brass ie ae (—Delia rad ie u ml.
See Cabbage maggots 
Hylurgopinus rufipes. See Elm bark 
beetles

516 ■ 
INDEX
Hyphaturia cunea. See Webworms. 
fall
Hvpoaspis. See Soil mites, buying and 
releasing 
Hyssop
as attractant crop. 450 
as pesticide. 42=1
I
Iberis. 122 
Iberis saxalilis. L22 
Iberis sempervirens. 122 
Ichneumon wasps. 297.232 
as beneficials.^^
Hex. 123
Immune plants. 414 
Impatiens. 124 
Impatiens balsamina. 124.
Impatiens wallerana. L24 
Imported cabbageworms, 297-98.
2 9 ft 
BTK for. 453 
cabbage and.53* 56 
Calendula and. 56 
garlic oil for, 423 
sticky board traps for, 43& 
Imported currantworms 
currant and. 86 
false hellebore for. 422 
gooseberry and. LOS.
Infectious diseases. See also 
Pathogens 
bacteria (see Bacterial 
development of. 342-43.342 
disease cycle. 343=44. 
fungi (see Fungi) 
mycoplasma-like organisms. 35J 
mycoplasmas. 351 
nematodes (see Nematodes) 
parasitic plants. !S4r55 
plant defenses. 344=45 
significant symptoms. 345 
viruses tw* Viruses)
Inoculation. 343.344 
Insecticidal soaps. See Soap sprays 
Insecticides. See also Botanical pesti­
cides; Organic sprays and dusts 
beneficials and. 451-52 
Insect impostors. 260-61
Insects
anatomy of. 256.256 
beneficial (see Beneficial animals 
and insects) 
controls for, 259- 262 (see also 
Controls) 
composting. 425=22 
coordinated. 262.263 
soil tillage. 428 
strategy planning. 263 
damage symptoms from. 264-6? 
feeding habits of. 157-58 
identification guide. 268--3J.7 
life cycles of. 252 
male, sterilization of. 415 
viruses carried by, 352 
Internal cork, sweet potato and. 220.
221
Ipomoea. 124
Ipomoea batatas. See Sweet potato 
Iris. 124=22
bearded. 125-26 
Japanese (see Iris ensata) 
problems of. 125, 126-27 
reticulated (see Iris reticulata) 
Siberian [see Iris sibirica)
Iris borers. 125* 126-27.298. 228 
Iris ensata. 125.126 
Iris kaempferi. 125 
Iris reticulata. 125. 126 
Iris sibirica. 125.126 
Iron deficiency, 376-77 
blueberry and. 46 
citrus and. 23 
Gardenia and. 326 
Rhododendron and. 368.376 
tomato and. 228 
Isopropyl alcohol sprays. 465-66 
Ivermectins. 466.424 
Ivy. See Hedera
J
Japanese beetles. 298-99.298 
Aesculus and. L4 
Alcea and. 16 
After and. 3Q 
Astilbe and. 31 
Betula and. 43 
blueberry and. 46=42
BT and. 459 
Buddleia and. 48 
bulbs and. 50 
Canna and. 59 
chestnut and. 69 
com and. 77.29 
Digitalis and. 9]
Echinacea and. 92 
grape and, 109.112 
Hamamelis and, LL3 
Hibiscus and. IL8 
kiwi a n d .130 
lawns and. 135 
milky disease spores for. 46tl 
nematodes and. 452 
Parthenocissus and. 16J 
perennials and. 176-77 
Petunia and. 129 
raspberry and. 138r39 
rhubarb and.203 
Rosa and. 2M  
Salix and. 208 
shaking and. 433 
Sorbus and, 2JI1 
sweet potato and. 222 
Tagetes and. 22A 
Tilia and. 222 
traps for. 436
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 236 
Ulmus and. 245 
Viburnum and. 249 
Japanese weevils 
Berberis and. 41 
Ilex and. 123 
Ligustrum and, 14J 
Juglans. See Walnut 
Juglans hindsii. 251 
Juglans nigra. See Walnut, black 
Juglans regia. See Walnut, English 
June beetles. 299.299 
sweet potato and. 222 
Juniper blight. 129. M L  395 
Juniper mealybugs, L23 
Juniper midges. 123 
Juniperus. 127-29
cedar-apple rust symptoms on. 
398
problems of. 128-29.128 
Juniperus chinensis var. sargentii. 129 
Juniperus virginiana. 25* S3-128 
Juniper webworms. 128. L29

INDEX 
■ 
517
K
Kale. 122
problems of. L22 
seed sterilization for. 423 
Kalmia. 122-30 
Kelp sprays. 412 
Kiwi. OQ 
Kohlrabi. L3Q
problems of. L3Q. 
seed sterilization for. 422
Lace bugs. 300.300 
Aster vad. 3Q 
Cotoneaster and. 82 
eggplant and. 23 
Lantana and. L31 
perennials and. 128 
Platanus and. L86 
Pvrucantha and. 192-93 
Quercus and. 194-95 
Rhododendron and. 2-3.200. 2H1 
Salix and. 209 
Lacewings. 300.300
as aphid predators. 67,122 
as beneficials. 7.449 
for annuals. 18. 
buying and releasing. 454 
citrus and. 23 
Gladiolus and. 106 
for lawns, L34 
green (see Green lacewings!
Lady beetle larvae, as fungus-feeders.
2 5 8
Lady beetles. 301.301
as aphid predators. 67,122 
as beneficials. 7 ,258.440. 453 
buying and releasing. 454. 
Gladiolus and. LQ6 
for lawns. 134 
convergent. 301.301 
Mexican bean beetles distin­
guished from. 260 
pyrethrin and. 480 
twice-stabbed. 301 
Ladybugs. See Lady beetles 
Ixigenidium. 461 
Lagerstroemia. L31
Lamb's-quarters. as attractant crop.
451 
Lantana. L3J 
Larch. See Larix
European {see Larix decidua( 
Japanese (see Larix kaempferi) 
Larch branch canker. 132 
Larch casebearers, L32 
Larch sawrflies
Larix and. 132 
shrews and. 453 
Larix. 132 
Larix decidua. L32 
Ixirix kaempferi. 132 
Larkspur. See Delphinium 
Larvae, as insect life cycle stage. 252 
Late blight. 324z25
potato and. 189* 19& 191.341.
360.374 
tomato and. 23L 232 
Lathyrus. 132
Lactuca saliva. See Lettuce 
Lawn aeration sandals, 431 
Lawn grasses. 2 
Lawnmower damage. 392.322 
Lawns. 132-3? 
culture. 133-34 
mowing. 431 
problems of. 133,134-37 
Leaf beetles
bean and <see Bean leaf beetles! 
Rosa and. 206 
trunk bands for. 446 
Ulmus and [see Elm leaf beetles) 
Leaf blight
com and. 28 
dill and. 92 
fig and. 22 
herbs and. L12 
lawns and. 136 
onion and. L56 
parsley and. IfiQ 
strawberry and. 217.212 
Leaf blister. 345.325
Quercus and, 193-94.194,375 
Leaf blotch. Aesculus and. 14 
Leaf curl. 345.352
peach and (see Peach leaf curl) 
Leafcutter bees. Rosa and. 206 
Leaf gall. 383
Rhododendron and. 383
Leafhoppers. 302.302 
annuals and. 12 
bean and. 33.35 
beet and.38.302 
carrot and.6Q 
Chrysanthemum and. 21 
Coreopsis and. 26 
Dahlia and. 82=88 
Dianthus and, 2Q 
diatomaceous earth for. 421 
dill and, 92
floating row covers for. 443 
garlic oil for. 423 
grape and. 111-12 
Gypsophila and. LL3 
lettuce and. 138 
mulches for, 444 
pea and. 162 
Petunia and. 129 
potato and. 188.302 
pyrethrin for. 480 
redbanded.302 
rhubarb and. 203 
Rosa and. 206-7 
tomato and. 3 
Tulipa and. 242 
Ulmus and. 245 
water sprays for. 433 
Leafminers. 303.303 
Aquilegia and. 22 
avermectins for. 4hb 
bean and. 36 
beet and.38 
Betula and (see Birch 
leafminers)
Buxus and, 51 
Carpinus and. 60 
Chrysanthemum and, 21 
Comus and. 81 
Delphinium and. 88 
Ilex and, 123 
lettuce and. 132 
Ligustrum and. 140-41 
mulches for. 444 
neem for. 422 
pea and. 163 
pepper and. 124 
Philadelphus and. 122 
Pinus and. 185 
pruning and. 431.432 
Quercus and. 125

518 
■ 
INDEX
Leafminers tcontinued)
Rhododendron and.202 
spinach and. 212 
Syringa and. 222 
Thuja and. 226 
Tilia and. 227
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 232 
Tropaeolum and. 240 
Ulmus and. 245,319 
vegetables and. 242 
Verbena and. 248 
Leafminer sawflies. 319.319 
Leaf nematodes. Begonia and. 40 
Leafroller caterpillars, omnivorous.
avocado and. .11-.12 
Leafrollers
annuals and .20 
Canna and. 59 
fruittrec. 293.293 
Lonicera and. 145 
obliquebanded. 311.311 
pheromone traps for. 435 
Quercus and. 195 
Spiraea and. 2L1
strawberry and. 218, 212
Leaf roll virus, potato and. L83 
Leaf scorch. 322 
Acer and. 13 
Aesculus and. 14 
apple and, 377 
strawberry and. 217.213 
Leaf spot. 350 
Acer and. L3
angular (see Angular leaf spot) 
annuals and. 13
bacterial (see Bacterial leaf spot)
Begonia and. 40
Betula and. 43
blackberry and. 44
cherry and (see Cherry leaf spot)
Delphinium and. 89
Fabraea.120
Fagus and. 92
Fraxinus and. 99
fungal (see Fungal leaf spot)
Ilex and, 123 
Iris and, 125.126 
lawns and. 136 
lettuce and. 139 
lime-sulfur for. 426 
Lobelia and. 144
Magnolia and. 142 
mint and. 151 
Parthenocissus and. lid 
pear a n d .120 
Pelargonium and, 123 
Platanus and. L86 
Quercus and, 135 
raspberry and. 138 
Rhododendron and, 201,202 
rhubarb an d .203 
Septoria (see Septoria leaf spot) 
soap sprays for. 483 
strawberry and. 217.218,213 
Syringa and. 223 
Thuja and. 226
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 232 
Ulmus and. 245 
Veronica and. 248 
Viburnum and. 249 
Viola and. 250 
Leaftiers
Hydrangea and. 121 
pyrethrin for, 480 
Leather mold, strawberry and. 212 
Leaves, diveu.se symptoms on 
curling or distortion. 382-83 
spots, 32Jb26
white, gray, or black patches. 
381-82
yellow or discolored leaves. 376-81 
Legumes, grains and. 418 
Lemon, oil sprays and. 423 
Lemon balm, as attractant crop. 450 
Leptinotarsa decemlineata. See Colo­
rado potato beetles 
Lesion nematodes, 309 
Lesser bulb flies, onion and. 156 
Lettuce. L32=4Q
compost or manure for, 418 
crop rotation and. 418 
culture, 132
problems of, 137-40.418 
romaine. PAN damage on. 378 
shade cloth for. 445 
soap sprays and. 484 
tillage for. 428 
Lettuce drop. 139
Lettuce root aphids. Euphorbia and. 
95
Lcucostoma canker. See Cytospora 
canker
Liatris. 140 
Light
excessive. 356 
lack of. 356 
Lighting, for houseplants. 113 
Lightning damage. 392.392 
Light traps, 432 
Ligustrum. 140=11 
Ligyrus (—Bothynusf gibbosus. See 
Carrot beetles 
Lilac. See Syringa 
Lilium. 141-43 
Lily. See Lilium
checkered (see fritillaria 
meleagris)
Lily-of-the-valley. See Convallaria 
fragrant (see Convallaria majalis 
Lima beans, downy mildew and. 34.
3132 
Lime, as pesticide, 426 
Lime-sulfur, as fungicide, 348.363 
Lime-sulfur sprays. 476-77 
Limonius. See Wireworms 
Linden. See Tilia 
Lindorus lophanthae. buying and 
releasing. 45h 
Liquidambar. 143 
Liriodendron. 143-44 
Listronotus oregonensis. See Carrot 
weevils 
Lizards. 453 
Lobelia. 144 
Lobelia cardinalis. 144 
Lobularia. 144-45 
Locust, honey. See Gleditsia 
Longtailed mealybugs. 304 
Lonicera. 145 
Loopers
cabbage (see Cabbage loopers) 
Fagusand.%
hemlock (see Hemlock loopers) 
neem for. 422 
soybean and. 461 
Lovage
as attractant crop. 450 
as trap crop. 440 
Lupinus. 145-46 
Lures, baits, and traps. 434=40 
Lycopersicon esculentum. See 
Tomato
Lygus bugs, perennials and. 128

INDEX 
■ 
519
Lygus lineolaris. See Tarnished plant 
bugs
Lymantria dispar. See Gypsy moths 
Lysiphlebus testaceipes, 454
M
Macrocenirusancylivorus. peach and. 
LftS
Macrodactylus subspinosus. See Rose 
chafers
Macronoctua onusta. See Iris borers 
Maggots
apple (see Apple maggots)
blueberry and. 45
cabbage (see Cabbage maggots)
cherry and, 66,62
pepper and. 123
root
radish and, 440 
tillage and. 428 
seedcom (we Seedcom maggots) 
use of term, 252 
walnut and. 250 
Magnesium deficiency 
carrot and. 62 
celery and, 64 
tomato and. 23Q 
Magnolia. 146?4I 
Mahonia. 142 
Mail-order nurseries. 423 
Maize dwarf mosaic, com and. 78,80 
Malacosoma. See Tent caterpillars 
Malus. 147. See also Apple 
Manduca quinquemaculata. See 
Tomato homworms 
Manduca sexta. See Tobacco 
homworms 
Manganese deficiency, pea and. L64 
Mantis religiosa. See Praying mantids 
Manual controls. 429.430-34 
handpicking. 4-30:21 
lawn aeration sandals. 431 
mowing. I l l  
pruning (5«»<» Pruning) 
shaking. 433 
vacuuming. 413 
water sprays. 433-34 
Maple. See Acer
Japanese (see Acerpalmatum)
Maple scales 
Acer and. 11 
Carpinus and, 60 
Maple velvet gall. 306 
Margined blister beetles. 274 
Marigold. See Tagetes 
pot (see Calendula)
Masked chafers, nematodes and.
452
May beetles. 299,299* See also June 
beetles
Meadow rue. See Thalictrum 
columbine (see Thalictrum 
aquilegi/olium)
Meadow spittlebugs. 325 
Mealybug destroyer larvae, mealybugs 
distinguished from, 261 
Mealybug destroyers. 303-4.303 
buying and releasing. 455. 
grape and, 110 
Mealybugs. 304.304 
annuals and, 20 
Begonia and.4Q 
bulbs and, 31 
citm sand.73.304 
Coleus and. 74 
grape and. 110 
handpicking, 430 
houseplants and. 12Q 
Juniperus and. L29 
Lantana and. I ll 
longtailed. 304 
Magnolia and. 142 
mealybug destroyer larvae distin­
guished from, 261 
neem for. 422 
perennials and. L22 
soap sprays for. 483 
superior oils for, 480 
Taxus and. 724-76 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 212 
Mediterranean fruit flics. 292 
Melanose. citrus and. 22. 23 
Melia azadarach. 423 
Melittia cucurbitae. See Squash vine 
borers
Mcloidac. See Blister beetles 
Melon. 1.4&--51
culture, 148t49
fruit problems of. 148,150-31
fungicides and. 369
leaf and vine problems of. 148, 
149:50 
squash and. 212 
watermelon. 251 
Melon aphids, 149.269 
Mentha. See Mint 
Mertensia. L51 
Mertensia virginica. 151 
Metamorphosis, of insects. 252 
Metaseiulus occidentalis. 452 
buying and releasing, 455. 452 
peach and, 162 
strawberry and, 219 
Methoprene, 473 
Mexican bean beetles. 305,305 
bean and. 34.36 
bug juice for, 420 
floating row covers for, 443 
green bean and. 440 
lady beetles distinguished from. 
260 
neem for. 422 
pyrethrin for. 480 
Mice
apple an d .26 
Crocus and. 83 
Michaelmas daisy. See Aster 
Microbial antagonists, 462 
Microorganisms
beneficial. 368-69.439^62 
infectious. 342 (see also Bacteria; 
Fungi; Viruses)
Midges
aphid (see Aphid midges)
Cornus and. 81 
Juniperus and. L29 
methoprene for. 423 
Rosa and. 204.206 
Mildew. 345.142
American gooseberry. 107.
108
downy (see Downy mildew) 
lime-sulfur for. 476.422 
powdery (see Powdery mildew) 
Milkweed, as vims host, 332 
Milky disease spores, 46QrfaJ 
Japanese beetles and. 459 
Milky spore disease. See Milky dis­
ease spores 
Millipedes, 2«0^L.28Q 
Mimosa. See Albizia

5 2 0  
■ 
IN D E X
Mimosa webworms. Li 
Mineral oil. as pesticide. 422 
Miners. See also Leafminers 
asparagus and. 22 
Mint. L5J
as attractant crop. 259.419.430 
problems of. Lil 
Minute pirate bugs. 30ft. 306 
as beneficials. 4AH
buying and releasing. 45i  
for lawns. L34 
Mistletoe. 354. 353. .197.397 
dwarf. 354.397 
leafy. 397 
Quercus and. 397 
true, ISA 
Mistletoe berries. 392 
Mites
Acer and. LI 
Arabis and.28 
bean and. 36 
blackberry and. 44 
bulb (see Bulb mites) 
citrus and. 22.307 
citrus oils for. 470.421 
eggplant and.93 
European red. IM. 457 
filbert and. 98 
Fraxinus and. 99 
as fungus-fccdcrs. 258 
gall. 306.306 
ash flower. 99 
Juniperus and. 122 
lawns and. 0 4  
lime-sulfur for. 426 
melon and. L49 
mint and. 15J 
neem for. 477 
oregano and. L58 
pea and. 163 
peach and. 162 
pear leaf blister (see Pear leaf 
blister mites) 
pepper and. 124 
predatory. 307.307.453.452 
buying and releasing.
452
raspberry and. 198 
rust, m
 307 
w ap sprays for. 483.4&4 
soil, buying and releasing. JSh
spider. See Spider mites 
squash and. 215 
sulfur for. 485 
superior oils for. 480 
tomato and, 230.302 
vegetables and. 242 
Mock orange. See Philadelphus 
Mold
bean and. 35.32 
gray (see Gray mold) 
sooty (see Sooty mold I 
strawberry and. 212 
Mole crickets
lawns and. 135 
nematodes and. 452 
Moles. 409 
Molts. 252
Molybdenum deficiency 
cauliflower and. 62-63 
pea and. 163 
Monarda. 131-32 
Monocultures, avoidance of. 2 
Morning glory. See Ipomoea 
Mosaic virus. 351-52
bean and (see Bean mosaic) 
cucumbcr and.84=85 (see also 
Cucumber mosaic virus) 
growth stunted by. 403 
Iris and. L22 
leaf sy mptoms. 322 
lettuce and. 138 
melon and. L49 
pea and. 163 
raspberry and. 200 
spinach and. 212 
squash and. 214.215 
tobacco I see Tobacco mosaic 
virus)
Mosquitoes
BTI for.460.424. 
false hellebore for. 422 
fungal pathogens for. 461 
garlic oil for. 423 
methoprene for. 423 
Moss pink. See Phlox subulaia 
Moss rose. See Portulaca 
Moths
Aesculus and. LI 
codling (see Codling moths) 
diamondback (see Diamondback 
moths)
grape and (see Grape berry moths) 
gypsy (see Gypsy moths)
Ilex and. 122
oriental fruit (m? Oriental fruit 
moths)
Pinus and. 183, JL&4 
strawberry and. 219-20 
tussock I see Tussock moths) 
Mountain ash. See Sorbus 
Mountain laurel. See Kalmia 
Mowing. 421 
Mulches. 429
as barriers. 443-44 
cultural problems and.358 
reflective. 367.444. 
winter, removing. 423 
Mummy berry, blueberry and. 45=46 
Muskmelon. 59 
Mustard
as attractant crop. 259.4M 
as trap crop. 440 
Mycoplasma-like organisms. 351 
Mycoplasmas. 351 
Myrtle. See Vinca 
Myrtle euphorbia. See Euphorbia 
myrsinites
N
Nabidae. See Damsel bugs 
Names of plants. 416.482t.88 
Narcissus. 152-53 
bulbs. 49
problems of. 152-53 
Narcissus bulb flies. 49, LS3 
Nasturtium. See Tropaeolum 
Natural pest control. See Controls 
Natural predators. 2z&
Natural resistance. 2^3 
Navel oranges, oil sprays and. 429 
Navel orangeworms, 308-9. 308 
citrus and. 22 
nematodes and. 452 
Neck rot. onion and. 152 
Needlccasts. 325
Pinus and, 184-83.375 
Needlcminers, spruce. L82 
Neem. 477-78
Nematodes. 309-10.309.353-54 
bean and,33 
Begonia and. 40

INDEX ■ 521
bcneficial. 457-58
Berberis and. 41
bulb (see Bulb nematodes)
Buxusand,52
chitin for. 420
control of. 254
corn and. 28
fig and. 92=98
foliar (see Foliar nematodes) 
garlic oil for. 423 
Hyacinthus and. L2J 
lesion. 309 
lettuce and. L28 
Narcissus and, 153 
nature of. 252 
pepper and.L24 
Phlox and. L8Q 
plant disease and. 242*244 
prevention of. 254 
root knot (.we Root knot 
nematodes)
Spiraea and, 213 
spread of, 254 
stem isee Stem nematodes) 
sweet potato and. 220.221 
symptoms of. 353-54 
timed planting and. 421 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 239 
vegetables and. 246 
Neodiprion. See Sawflies. conifer 
Neoplectana i —Steinernema! car­
pocapsae. 452 
Nicotiana. 152 
Nicotine. 428
Nightshade, as virus host. 252 
Nitrogen deficiency. 328 
bean and. 25 
beet and. 37.38=29 
cabbage and. 54 
carrot and. faQAl 
citrus and. 23 
com and. 28 
herbs and, 1 16-17 
Ilex and. L22 
lettuce and. L38 
melon and. 150-51 
onion and. L55 
pea and. L62 
pepper a n d .174.278 
radish and. 195 
spinach and. 212
tomato and. 22Q 
vegetables and. 246 
Nitrogen excess. 262 
Paeonia and. 152 
pepper and. 125 
tomato and, 231-32 
Nitrogen-fixing nodules. 400.400 
Noctuidae. See Armyworms: Cuworms 
Nomenclature for plants. 416.487-88 
Norbac 84-C, 462 
Northern com leaf blight. 28 
Northern com rootworms. 2L 2JLQ 
Nosema locustae. 135.462 
Nuclear polyhedrons viruses. 461 
Nutrient deficicncy. 355.263 
control of. 356-57 
Nutrient excess. 355-56.262 
Nutrients
from growth enhancers. 412 
from organic fertilizers. 411 
Nymph, as insect life cycle stage. 252
0
Oak. See Quercus 
Oak lace bugs, 194-95 
Oak wilt. 124,221225 
Obliquebanded leafrollers. 311.311 
Ocimum basilicum. See Basil 
Oil sprays, 347,479-80 
Okra.L54=55
disease susceptibility of. 430 
Oleander scale. 320 
Omnivorous insects. 258 
Omnivorous leafroller caterpillars, avo­
cado and,3L J2 
Onion. 155-58
crop rotation and. 418 
culture. L55 
problems of. 155-57 
seedling protectors and. 445 
sod and. 418 
timed planting and. 422 
Onion flies, sticky board traps for. 438 
Onion leaf blight. L56 
Onion maggots. 211 -12.311 
bait traps for. 435 
capsaicin dusts for. 426 
diatomaceous earth for, 422 
garlic and. UM 
nematodes and. 452
onion and. 156 
timed planting and. 422 
Onion smudge. L52 
Onion thrips. Allium and. 16 
Orange rust
blackberry and. 44 
raspberry and. 128 
Oranges, navel, oil sprays and. 429 
Orangeworms. navel. See Navel 
orangeworms 
Oregano. L5&
Organic fertilizers, nutrients in. 411 
Organic sprays and dusts, 256* 262. 
4QL.4fcH>4 
application methods. 465 
beneficial insects and. 258 
careful handing of. 463-64 
for disease. 369
for pests of humans and pets. 424 
products. 464-85 
synergists and inert ingredients 
of. 469
Organisms. See also Microorganisms 
antagonistic, 462 
Orgyia. See Tussock moths 
Oriental beetles, lawns and. 125 
Oriental fruit moths. 312-13.212 
almond tree and. L2 
apricot and. 26 
cherry and. 68 
peach and, 165,166 
pheromone traps for. 437.480 
viral pathogens for. 462 
Origanum heracleoticum. See Oregano 
Orius insidiosus. See Minute pirate 
bugs
Orius tristicolor. See Minute pirate 
bugs
Ostrinia nubUalis. See European com 
borers
Otiorhynchus ovatus. See Strawberry 
root weevils 
Otiorhynchus sulcatus. See Black vine 
weevils 
Oxygen, lack of. 256 
Oystershell scale. 320 
Fraxinus and, 99 
Ozone damage. 228 
onion and. 156. L52 
Tropaeolum and. 328 
Ozone pollution. 256

5 2 2  
■ 
IN D E X
P
Pachysandra. 1S8-S9 
Paeonia. 1
Botrytis blight symptoms on.
373
problems of. 139-60 
Painting fruit trees. 444.
PAN damage. See Peroxyacetyl nitrate 
damage 
Pansy. See Viola 
Papaver. 160 
Papaver alpinum. L6Q 
Papaver nudicaule, list!
Papaver orient ale. L6C1 
Parasitic plants. 343.344.334-35 
Parasitoids, 258 
Parsley.
as attractant crop. 239.430 
problems of. liil 
Parsnip. 160-61
crop rotation and. 418 
problems of. lid 
Parthenocissus. lid 
Pastinaca sativa. 160-61 
Patch, brown, lawns and. 0 5  
Pathogens. 342-44. 348. See also Infec­
tious diseases
breaking life cycle of. 363-64 
soilborne. 413 
PBO. m
 
Pea. 161-64
crop rotation and.418
culture. 161-62
host resistance of. 414
leaf and whole plant problems.
162-63 
nodules on roots of. MO 
pod problems of. L63r64 
sweet (see Lathyrus) 
timed planting and. 471-2? 
young, soap sprays anti. 483 
Pea aphids. Lf>2 
Peach. L64i6b
brown rot symptoms on. 320 
culture. L64
Cytospora canker symptoms on.
m
fruit problems of. LM. 165. L66 
leaf and branch problems of. 165.
166-68
peach leaf curl symptoms on. 383 
peach rosette symptoms on. 394 
pollination of. 101 
pruning. LQ3
whole plant problems of. 165, 
.168,362 
Peach aphids, green. 269.419 
Peach leaf curl. 344.383 
bordeaux mix for. 462 
copper for. 421 
peach and. 165. 167.383 
Peach rosette. 168.394.394 
Peach scab. 165, L66 
Peachtree borers. 313.313 
apricot and. 22 
cherry and. 69 
peach and, 165, L68 
pheromone traps for. 432 
Peach twig borers 
almond and. 12 
apricot and. 26 
peach and. 165. 166-67 
Pear. 168-71
bacterial disease and, 343 
bagging for. 441 
culture. 168 
disease control for. 364 
fruit problems of. 168-70.169 
leaf problems of. 169.170-71 
pollination of. liil 
pruning. 103. .163 
Pear leaf blister mites 
Cotoneaster and. 82 
pear and. 17]
Sorbus and. 211 
Pear psyllas. 169-70.169, 314.314 
Pear sawflies. 314.314 
Pear scab. 168-69. L2Q 
Pear slugs
cherry and. 68 
pear and. 169. Ill 
Pea weevils
pea and. 1M 
tillage and. 428 
Pecan,171-72 
Pecan nut casebearers. 111 
Pecan scab. 122 
Pecan weevil grubs. L21 
Pedtobius foveolatus. bean and. 36 
Pelargonium. 172-73 
Pentatomidac. See Stink bugs
Peony. See Paeonia 
Pepper. L23i26 
culture. 173-74 
flower and fruit problems of, 
175-76
leaf and whole plant problems of.
173-75 
mulches and. 444 
nitrogen deficiency damage on,
378
potato and, L88 
seed sterilization for. 421 
soap sprays and. 484 
strawberry and. 219 
tomato and. 228 
Popper dusts. 426 
Pepper maggots. 125 
Pepper weevils. 125 
Perennials. 176-78 
Periwinkle. See Vinca
common (see Vinca minor) 
greater (see Vinca major) 
Peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN) damage, 
3S6.37K-79 
Persea americana. See Avocado 
Pest control. See Controls 
Pesticides. See also Organic sprays 
and dusts 
all-purpose spray, 466 
application methods. 465 
botanical. 468 (see also specific 
types)
careful handling of. 463-64 
synergists and inert ingredients 
of. m
Pests
handling plants and. 3 
planning for, 8-10 
problem diagnosis for, 9 
site selection and. 2rl 
Petroselinum crispum. See Parsley 
Pets, pesticides and. 474
Petunia. 178-79 
Phaseolus. See Bean 
Pheromones. 48Q 
Pheromone traps. 437-38
for codling moth control. 262. 
263
Philadelphus. L22
Philaenus spumarius. See Spittlebugs 
Phloem necrosis. Ulmus and. 245

IN D E X  
■ 
5 2 3
Phlox. 179-30
creeping (see Phlox stolonifera) 
garden (see Phloxpaniculata) 
problems of. L80 
Phlox maculata. 358 
Phlox paniculata. 179. 180. 358 
Phlox plant bugs. 180 
Phlox stolonifera. 129 
Phlox subulata. L23 
pH of soil. See Soil pH 
Phomopsis blight, eggplant and. l23 
Phosphorus deficiency. 323 
beet and.32 
cabbage and. 54 
carrot and. 62 
celery and. 64 
corn and. 77* TH, 
379 
cucumbcr and. 8f> 
potato and. liil 
radish and. 195 
tomato and. 23U 
Phthorimaea operculella. See Potato 
tuberworms 
Phyllophaya. See June beetles 
Phylloxeras, grape and. See Grape 
phylloxeras 
Physical controls. 259.406.429-46 
baits, traps, and lures. 429-30.
434-40 
barriers. 429.440-46 
manual controls. 429.430-34 
methodology. 429-30 
mulches (see Mulches) 
Physiological disorders, 355-38 
Phytoseiidae. See Mites, predatory 
Phytoseiulus longipes. 452 
Phytoseiulus persimilis. 452 
buying and releasing. 4\>
Picea. LtilhhZ
problems of. 181-82. 181 
Picea pun gens, 479 
Pickleworms. 315.315 
squash and. 215.216 
Pierce’s disease, grape and. LL2 
Pieris. 182-83
Pieris(= Artogeia)rupee. See Imported 
cabbageworms 
Pillbugs.324,324
nematodes and. 452 
Pinching blossoms. 4 
Pine. See Pinus
Pine bark adelgids. 1M  
Pinc-oak gall rusts. 185 
Pinc-pinc gall rusts. L85 
Pine sawflies. European. 115 
Pine shoot moths. 183.184 
Pine tip moths. L83 
Pink. See Dianthus
maiden (see Dianthus deltoides) 
Pink patch, lawns and. 0 6  
Pink root, onion and. 155.156.152 
Pinus. 183-85
needlecast symptoms on. 325 
problems of. 183-85.181 
sapsucker damage on. 3SL2 
Pinworms
tillage and. 42£ 
tomato. 233.480 
Piperonyl butoxide (PBO).463 
Pirate bugs, minute. See Minute pirate 
bugs
Pisum sativum. See Pea 
Planetree. See Platanus
American (see Platanus O c ­
cident alis)
London (see Platanus x  acerifolia) 
Planning.fi
Plantain lily. See Hosta 
Plant bugs
annuals and. 19 
four-lined (see Riur-lined plant 
bugs)
Phlox and. L80 
soap sprays for. 484 
tarnished («'*• Tarnished plant 
bugs)
Yucca and. 252 
Plant disorders. 353-38 
Plant-eating insects. 237-38 
Plant family, crop rotation by. 416.417 
Plant hardiness zone map. 486 
Plant lice. Dianthus and. 9Q 
Plant names, 416.487-88 
Plants
cultural problems of, 10 
defenses of. 344-43 (see also 
Resistance; Resistant plants) 
destroying diseased. 364 
disease symptoms on 
plants fall over, 4113 
plants stunted. 403 
seedlings die. 402-3
disorders of. 355-58 
diversity of. ftfi 
handling. 3
healthy (see Healthy plants) 
houseplants. 119-20 
labels on. 342 
problems of. 8=10 
selection of. 361.423 
stunted growth of. 403 
watering of. 362 
Platanus. 185-86 
Platanus x  acerifolia, 183 
Platanus occidentalis. 1&5 
Plum. 186-87
black knot symptoms on. 347.
398
brown rot symptoms on. 390 
E uropean.101. L86 
fruit problems of. 186 
Japanese.101.186 
leaf and branch problems of. l&Z 
pollination of. HU 
pruning. LQ3 
Plum curculios. 315-16.315 
apple and. 23, 24. 
apricot and. 26 
cherry and. 66.62 
chickcns and. 453 
peach and. [64. L6fc 
plum and. 186 
Plum leaf scald. L82 
Plutella xyllostella. See Diamondback 
moths
Podisus maculiventris. See Spined 
soldier bugs 
Podosphaera leucotricha. -149 
Poisons, botanical. 468. See also spe­
cific types 
Pollution. 35f>
Popillia japonica. See Japanese beetles 
Poplar. See Populus
yellow (see Liriodendron)
Poppy. See Papaver
alpine (see Papaver alpinum) 
Iceland (see Papa\-er nudicaule) 
Oriental <see Papaver orientale) 
Populus. l£2 
Portulaca. 187-88 
Potassium deficiency. 322 
beet and.39 
broccoli and. 42

524 ■ 
INDEX
Potassium deficiency i continued/ 
brussels sprouts and. 48 
cabbage and. 36 
corn and.80 
onion and. L52 
potato and. 131 
sweet potato and. 221 
tomato and. 2.10. 379 
Potato. 188-92
bacterial soft rot symptoms on.
401
as bait crop, 435 
blight infection of. M l. Ifc8 
compost or manure for. 418 
crop rotation and. 41b 
culture. 1&&
late blight symptoms on. 374 
leaf and whole plant problems of.
188-90. 189 
pepper an d .L21 
scab symptoms on. 402 
site selection and. 3 
sod and. 118 
strawberry and. 213 
sulfur and. 485 
sweet I see Sweet potato) 
tomato and. 228 
tuber problems of. 189. 190-92 
Potato leafhoppers. 302 
bean and. 33.15 
pea and. 162 
potato and. L&fi 
Potato tubcrworms. 189.191.316.
116,462 
Pot marigold. See Calendula 
Potting mix. pasteurization of, 4L3 
Powdery leaves, antitranspirants and.
H i
Powdery mildew. .145.347.349.360.
368 
Acer and. 13 
Achillea and. U  
Aesculus and. LI 
annuals and. 13 
apple and. 23. 25.387.388 
Aster and. 30 
Astilbe and. 31 
baking soda sprays for. 462 
bean and. 35.32 
Begonia and. =10 
Betula and. 43
bordeaux mix for, 462 
cherry and. 68 
compost tea and. 122 
Comus and. 81 
cucumber and. 85 
currant and. 86 
Delphinium and,88-89 
dextrin for. 484 
Digitalis and. 91 
Euonymus and. 34 
Fagus and. 32
fruit symptoms, 387-88.388-89
grape and. 108.109, 110. 111.388
Hedera and. 114
Helianthus and. 114
herbs an d .112
Heuchera and. 117-18
houseplants and. L2Q
Hydrangea and. 122
Hex and. 123
lagerstroemia and. 121
Lathyrus and. 112
leaf sympioms. 381
lettuce and. 138-39
Ligustrum and. LL1
lime-sulfur for. 422
Liriodendron and. 141
Lonicera and. 145
Lupinus and. L46
melon and. L43
Monarda and. L52
Parthenocissus and. L61
pea and. 163
peach and. 162
perennials and. 177-78
Philadelphus and. 123
Phlox an d .180.358
Platanus and. 186
Populus and. 182
pruning and, 431.412
pumpkin and, 381
Quercus and, 134
raspberry and, 197.198
Rosa and. 204. 205-6
rosemary and. 202
soap sprays for. 483
Spiraea and. 211
squash and. 215
strawberry and. 218, 213
sulfur for. 485
Syringa and, 222-23
Thalictrum and. 225 
Thunbergia and. 226 
Tilia and. 222 
Ulmus and. 245 
vegetables and. 242 
Verbena and, 247-48 
Viburnum and. 243 
Weigela and. 251 
Zinnia and. 253,381 
Powdery mildew fungus. 344 
Pox. sweet potato and, 221 
Praying mantids. 317.317 
buying and releasing. 
as predators. 25fl 
Predators, natural, 2=8 
Predatory insects. 258 See also Bene­
ficial animals and insects 
Predatory mites. See Mites, predatory 
Primrose. See Primula 
Primula. 132 
Privet. See Ligustrum 
Protozoans. 462 
Pruning. 431-32
for disease control, 362.363.364.
411-12 
for insect control. 431-32 
sanitation and. 423-24 
types of cuts. IHL 235 
Pruning and training, of fruit trees.
101-3.102 
Prunus. See Cherry ; Plum 
Prunus armeniaca. See Apricot 
Prunus avium. See Cherry’, sweet 
Prunus cerasus. See Cherry, sour 
Prunus domestica. See Plum. European 
Prunus dulcis var. dulcis. See Almond 
Prunus persica. See Peach 
Prunus salicina. See Plum. Japanese 
Pscudococcidae. See Mealybugs 
Pseudomonas blight, pear and. 120 
Pseudomonas marginalis. 418 
PsUa rosae. See Carrot rust flies 
Psyllas, pear. See Pear psyllas 
Psyllids, Buxus and. 51 
Pumpkin. 212
cold storage of. 362 
powdery mildew symptoms on. 
381
Pupa, as insect life cycle stage. 252 
Purple blotch, onion and. L52 
Putnam scale. Fraxinus and. S3

IN D E X  
■ 
5 2 5
Pyracantha 192-93 
Pyrethrin .4SJ.4fr.V4M. 4KO-81 
Pyrethrum. See Pyrethrin 
Pyrethrum flowers. 480 
Pythium ultimum. 462
Q
Quarantines. 361
Quassia. 481
Quassia amara. 481
Queen Anne's lace, as attractant crop.
451
Quercus. I93-95
leaf blister symptoms on. 325 
oak wilt symptoms on. 395 
problems of. 193-95.194 
root rot symptoms on. 4QJ 
Quince, flowering. See Chaenomeles
R
Rabbits. 402
Anemone and. li< 
apple and. 26 
lettuce and. 14Q 
Raccoons, corn and. 29 
Radish. 195-%
as attractant crop. 259 
Daikon. 195 
as repellent crop. 419 
root problems of. 195-% 
timed planting and. 422 
as trap crop. 440 
Ragweed, as virus host. 352 
Rain gauge. 3G0 
Raphanus sativus. See Radish 
Raspberry. 196-200
black. 1%. 198.20Q
cane blight symptoms on. 391
culture. 196-97
fruit problems of. 197-98.192
leaf and branch problems of. 197.
198-99 
lime-sulfur spray for. 422 
purchase of. 423 
purple, 1%. 2QQ 
red. 1%, 197,198. 200
viruses and. 352
whole plant problems of. 197.
199-200 
Raspberry cane borers 
raspberry and. 199-20Q 
Rosa an d ,206 
Raspberry crown borers. 199,291 
Raspberry fruitworm beetles. 198-99 
Raspberry fruitworms. 197-98.197 
Raspberry homtails. 199-200 
Raspberry leaf spot. 198 
Raspberry sawflies. 19&
Rats, avocado and. 31 
Record keeping, tL 357.415 
Redbandcd leafhoppers, 302 
Redbcrry mites, blackberry and. 44 
Red cedar. See Juniperus 
Redheaded pine sawflies. 319 
Rednecked cane borers
raspberry and. 197.199-200 
Rosa an d .206 
Red scale, citrus and. 73 
Red stele. 400=401
strawberry and. 219.360.400 
Red thread, lawns and. 136 
Rcduviidac. See Assassin bugs 
Reflective mulches. 367.444 
Repellent crops. 419 
Resistance, 412=15 
autocidal. 415 
in garden.415 
heating potting soil for. 413 
host. 414-15 
natural, 2=3 
ratings. 414.
Resistant plants. 363.410-11.414. See 
also Cultivars. resistant 
Rhagoletes. See Fruit flies 
Rhagoletis pomonella. See Apple 
maggots 
Rhamnus. grape and. 1 U1 
Rheum rhabarharum. See Rhubarb 
Rhizobium. 400 
Rhizoctonia solani. 462 
Rhododendron. 200-202
iron deficiency and. 368- 376 
leaf gall symptoms on. 383 
problems of. 200.201. 202 
pruning. 365 
resistance of. 2-3.414 
Rhododendron borers. 201. 202.291
Rhubarb. 202-3
crop rotation and. 4L8 
culture. 202=3 
problems of. 203 
Rhubarb curculios. 203 
Ribes. See Currant 
Ribes hirtellum. See Gooseberry 
Ribes nigrum. See Currant. European 
black
Ribes petraeum. See Currant 
Ribes rubrum. See Currant, red 
Ribes sativum. See Currant 
Ribes uva-crispa. See Gooseberry 
Ring rot, bacterial, potato and. L89, 
191
Ring spot viruses. 352 
Rock cress. See Arabis 
Rodents. See also specific types 
Crocus and. 83 
Lilium and. L43 
Tulipa and, 242 
Rodolia cardinalis. See Vidalia beetles 
Rogueing out, 364 
Romaine lettuce. PAN damage on. 
328
Root knot nematodes. 309.400 
bean and. 33 
cabbage and. 54 
carrot and.6£L61 
herbs and. L16 
lettuce and. 13&
Liatris and. L40 
okra and. 154.4.10 
Paeonia and. 159-60 
potato and. 189.190.191 
sanitation and, 422 
sweet potato and. 221 
tomato and. 230.400 
vegetables and. 246 
Root maggot fly barriers. 445 
Root maggots
radish and. 440 
tillage and. 428 
Root rot, 401
Amananthus and. LZ 
Armillaria. 403.403 
avocado and, 32 
bean and. 33 
Betula aniL4Ql 
black (see Black root rot) 
Campanula and. 58-59

5 2 6  
■ 
IN D E X
Root rot <continuedf 
carrot and. 61 
Cedrus and. 63 
control of,364 
cotton. 172.363 
Delphinium and. &9 
fungal. 346 
herbs and. LL2 
Mertensia and. L51 
pea and. 162 
Pinus and. 1&5 
Quercus and. 401 
rosemary and. 202 
salt for. 4£3
timed planting and. 422 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 232 
vegetables and. 246 
Roots
disease sy mptoms on. See Stems 
and roots, disease symptoms on 
examination of. 4 
Rootworms, corn and. 283.285 
Rosa. 203=2
black spot symptoms on. 322 
Botrytis blight sy mptoms on. 385 
climbers. 2 0 2
crown gall symptoms on. 399 
culture. 205 
disease resistance of. 6 
floribundas. 203 
fungal sprays and. 369 
grandifloras. 205 
hybrid teas. 205 
lime-sulfur spray for, 422 
mulches and. 444 
problems of. 204,205=2 
Rose. See Row
Christmas (see Helleborus niger) 
Lenten I .tee Helleborus Orientalis) 
moss ( we Portulaca )
Rose black spot. 204, 203.369. 372,
4&3
Rose chafers. 3 17.317 
Alcea and. 16 
bulbs and. 50 
Hydrangea anil. 122 
nematodes and. 4i& 
perennials and. 126 
Rosa and. 204. 206 
Rose curculios. 204. 206
Rose leaf beetles. 206 
Rosemary, 202
as attractant crop. 450 
as pesticide. 424 
problems of. 202 
Rose midges. 204,206 
Rosei'f-S ha non. See Hibiscus 
Rose sawflies, 205 
Rose stem girdlcrs. 20b 
Rosette. 44. See also Peach rosette 
Resetting, 352
Rosmarinus officinalis. See Rosemary 
Rot. 345
apple and. 24
bacterial (see Bacterial rot) 
bird's eye (see Anthracnose) 
black (see Black rot) 
blackberry and.44 
blossom end (see Blossom end rot! 
Botrytis {see Botrytis bunch rot, 
grape and; Botrytis fruit rot) 
brown (see Brown rot) 
bulb. 49
crown (see Crown rot) 
fungal (see Fungal rot)
Gladiolus and, 
herbs and. L12 
lettuce and. 132 
Narcissus and. L53 
onion and. 156.152 
Platanus and. JLH46 
raspberry and. IH2 
rhubarb an d .203 
root (see Root rot)
Sclerotium.426 
stem (see Stem rot ) 
of trees, shrubs, and vines. 238 
Rotation of crops. See Crop rotation 
Rotenone, 481-82 
Roundheadcd appletree borers. 2b.
313.318
Rove beetles, m
 318 
attracting. 451 
as beneficials. MU 
earwigs distinguished from. 260 
refuges of. 253 
Row covers
floating. 442-43 
rigid. 442=43 
sanitation and. 424-25
Rubus. See Blackberry;
Raspberry 
Rubus idaeus. See Raspberry, 
red
Rubus x neglectus. See Raspberry, 
purple
Rubus occidentals. See Raspberry.
black 
Rudbeckia. 202
as attractant crop. 450 
problems of. 202 
Rudbeckia hirta. 207 
Rue. as pesticide. 424 
Rumina decollata. See Decollate 
snails 
Rust. 34.3,347,373-76 
Alcea and, 16.375 
Antirrhinum and. 21 
asparagus and. 30 
bean and. 34.36 
blackberry and. 44.325 
bordeaux mix for. 462 
Centaurea and. 65 
corn and. 77.28 
currant and. Jib 
Dianthus and. 90 
fig and. 92 
Fraxinus and. 99 
Hydrangea -and, 122 
Juniperus and. 128.128 
lawns and. 136-37 
Lilium and. L12 
mint and, JL51 
onion and, 152 
Picea and, 1&2 
Pinus and, 183.184,1M 
Rosa and. 204. 206 
sage and. 2Q& 
soap sprays for. 4h3 
Sorbus and. 211 
spinach and. 242 
sulfur for. 485 
thyme and, 226 
Tsuga and. 241 
Rust flies, carrot and. See Carrot rust 
flics
Rust mites. 307.302 
Rutabaga, oil sprays and.
479 
Ryania. 482

INDEX ■ 
527
Sabadilla, 4&3 
Sage
garden (culinary), 20£L 209 
as pesticide. 424 
scarlet (see Sa/via splendent) 
silver (see Salvia argentea)
Salix. 208=9
Salt, as pesticide, 4iU
Salt injury. 382
Hedera and . 382 
Saltmarsh caicrpillar. 33d 
Salvia. 209
disease resistance of, 410-11 
Salvia argentea. 209 
Salvia officinalis. See Sage, garden 
(culinary)
Salvia sp leadens. 20iL4±Q 
Sandals, lawn aeration. 431 
Sanitation. 364.412.422-23.432 
end-of-season chores. 424-23 
maintaining standards for.
423=24 
preparation for. 422-23 
soil solarization for. 424 
of tools (see Tools, sanitation of) 
San Jose scale. 320
apple and. 23* 23. 26 
avocado and. 32 
cherry and. 6a 
Fraxinus and.99 
pear and, 12J 
Sap beetles, corn and. 29 
Saperda Candida. See Roundheaded 
appletree borers 
Sapphire flower. See Browallia 
Sapsucker damage. 392.392 
Sawflies
apple and. 439 
conifer, 319.319 
false hellebore for. 422 
Fraxinus and. 99 
Larix and. 132.433 
leafminer. 319.319 
Lonicera and. 145 
pear and. ILL 314 
Pinus and, 184.185.319 
quassia for. 481 
raspberry and. LQK
8
Rosa and. 205
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 136-37 
Scab.402
acidic soil and.3k} 
apple and (see Apple scab) 
avocado and. 31 
beet and.38 
citrus and. 22 
cucumber and. 86 
Gladiolus and. 106 
lime-sulfur for. 426 
melon and, L50 
peach and. 165. 166 
pear and. 16*-69. LZ0 
pecan and. LZ2 
potato and. 191.402 
Py racantha and. L92 
radish and. L96 
Sorbus and. 211 
squash and. 213.216 
Scab anthracnose. cucumbcr and. 83 
Scale(s)
Acer ami. 13.321 
alcohol sprays for. 465 
ammonia sprays for. 466 
armored. 320.320 
Berberis and. 41 
black. 7^321 
brown soft. 321
bulbs and. 31
flu*ujand.52 
California red. 21320 
Camellia and. 38 
Carpinus and. 60 
Cedrus and. 63 
Celastrus and. 63 
Chaenomeles and. 63 
citrus and. 23 
Clematis and. 74 
Cornusand,81 
Cotoneaster and. 82 
Daphne and. 88 
Euonymus and. 94.95 
Fagus and. 96 
fig and. 92 
Fraxinus and. 99 
grape and. LL2 
handpicking. 430 
Hedera and. 114 
hemispherical. 321
houseplants and. 120 
//ex and. 122 
Juniperus and. 128-29 
Ligustrum and. 141 
lime-sulfur for. 426 
Liquidambar and. L41 
Liriodendron and. 144 
Lonicera and. 145 
Magnolia and. 146 
Mahonia and. 142 
oleander. 320 
oystershell.99,320 
Pachysandra and. 138=3.9 
Parthenocissus und. 161 
peach and. 168 
perennials and. 122 
Picea and. 1&2 
Pinus and. Ifi5 
Platanus and. L86 
Populus and. 1£2 
Pyracantha and. 193 
Quercus and, 194 
Rhododendron and. 202 
Rosa and.202 
5a/<> and, 209
San Jose (see San lose scale)
soap sprays for, 483
soft. 32L 321
Sorbusan d ,211
Spiraea and. 213
superior oils for. 480
Syringa and. 223
Taxus and. 223
Thuja and. 223
Tilia and. 227
on trees, shrubs, and vines.
232=38 
Tsuga and. 241 
Ulmus and. 243 
Viburnum and, 249 
Yucca and. 232 
Scale predatory beetles, buying and 
releasing. 456 
Scarab beetles, lawns and. L33 
Scare tactics, for animals. 408.409 
Scavenger insects. 25S 
Schoenocaulon officinale. 482 
Sclerotium rot. 426 
Scolytus multistratus. See Elm bark 
beetles

5 2 8  
■ 
IN D E X
ScoJvtus rugulosus. See Shothole borers 
Scorch, leaf. See Leaf scorch 
Scurf
potato and. LSLL 
sweet potato and. 221 
Seaweed sprays. 112 
Sedum. 2Q2il[l 
Sedum spectabile. 2111 
Seed catalogs, resistance indicated in. 
H i
Seedcorn beetles, corn and. 22 
Seedcom maggots 
bean and. 33 
corn and.22 
nematodes and. 152 
pea and. L62 
Seedlings
damping-off symptoms on. 402 
disease-free medium for. 113 
dying of. 402-3 
protectors for. H i  
Seeds
clean. 361
heat treatment of. 367.4??-?3 
saving. 112, H 5 
Senecio. 211)
Septoria leaf spot. 326 
copper for. 121 
currant and. Jib 
gooseberry and. LL1& 
tomato and. 231.376 
Sex pheromones. 479-80. See also 
Pheromone traps 
Shade cloths, H i 
Shaking. H i
Shell bean, host resistance of. 114 
Shothole borers. 322.322 
cherry and.68 
Shothole disease 
almond and. 12 
apricot and. 26-27 
peach and. L62 
Shrews, 153
Shrubs. See Trees, shrubs, and vines 
Signs, of disease, symptoms vs.. 320 
Silk tree. See Albizia 
Silkworms, as beneficials. 258 
Site selection. 2-3. H i
for fruit crops. 100-103 
Six-spotted tiger beetles. 332 
Slime flux. 393. 393
Slugs. See also Slugs and snails 
chervil and. 440 
pear (see Pear slugs) 
physical controls for. 422 
Primula and. 132 
Rosa and. 20i 
toadsand.2=&
Slugs and snails. 322-11.322 
Allium and. 16 
Anemone and. IK 
annuals and. 18-19 
barriers for, 441.442 
Begonia and. 11 
bulbs and. SO-51 
Calendula and. 56 
Campanula and. 58 
Canna and. 52 
Cimicifuga and. 21 
Convallaria and. 25 
Delphinium and,88 
diatomaceous earth for. 121 
Digitalis and. 21 
Epimedium and. 24 
handpicking, 130 
Hosta and. LLfi 
Impatiens and. 121 
Iris and. 126 
lettuce and. 110 
Pelargonium and. L23 
perennials and. 122 
Petunia and. L22 
strawberry and. 217.218 
tillage and. 128 
tomato and. 231.233 
traps for. 438 
trunk bands for. 116 
Tulipa and. 212 
vegetables and. 242 
Viola and. 250 
Smudge, onion. L52 
Smut
corn and (see Corn smut) 
onion and. 152 
Snails. See also Slugs and snails 
brown garden. 322,15fi 
decollate. 45S 
Snakeroot. See Cimicifuga 
Snakes. 453
Snapdragon. See Antirrhinum 
Soap sprays. 463.464.483-84 
Sod crops, pests and. 118
Sod webworms
lawns and. 133,135 
nematodes and. 152 
Soft rot, bacterial. See Bacterial soft 
rot
Soft scale. 321.321 
Fraxinus and, 99
Soil
acidic, disease and. 363.376-77. 
326
balancing fertility of. 363 
for healthy plants, 3,5, HO 
heat treatment of. 113 
solarization of. 423.121 
water in.5j356 
waterlogged. 385 
Taxus and, 385 
Soil-improving crops. 118 
Soil mites, buying and releasing, 456 
Soil pH. 5. See also Soil, acidic, 
disease and 
adjusting, 363
overly high (see Iron deficiency) 
Soil tillage. See Tillage 
Solanum melongena var. esculentum.
See Eggplant 
Solanum tuberosum. See Potato 
Solarization. of soil. 423.121 
Soldier beetles, 323 
as beneficials. ISA 
downy leatherwinged. 323 
Soldier bugs, spined. See Spined sol­
dier bugs 
Sooty blotch, apple and. 25 
Sooty mold. 382.382 
annuals and. L2 
apple and. 25 
bulbs and. 51 
cherry and. 62 
filbert and, 28 
grape and. 110 
houseplants and, 120 
perennials and. 122 
from scale. 321
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 235-36.
237
vegetables and, 216 
Sorbus. 210-11 
Sour bugs, fig and. 22 
Southern bacterial wile, tomato and. 
230=31

INDEX ■ 
529
Southern corn leaf blight, com and. 2fi 
Southern com rootworms. 75.283. 285 
Southernwood. See Artemisia 
abrotanum 
Southwestern com borers. 79.323-24.
323
Sowbugs. 324,324 
barriers for. 442 
mulches for. 444 
nematodes and, 452 
Soybean, tiap crops and. 440 
Soybean loopers, viral pathogens for, 
461 
Speck
bacterial, tomato and. 231.232 
fly. apple and. 25 
Speedwell. See Veronica
woolly ( vee Veronica incana) 
Sphaerotheca fuliginea. 349 
Spider mite destroyers. 301 
Spider mites. 308.308 (see also Spruce 
spider mites)
Ageratum and. 15 
annuals and. Id 
Antirrhinum and. 21 
avermectins for. 466 
Buxusand.51 
cherry and. 68 
Convallaria and. 25 
Cotoneaster and. 82 
Delphinium and. 89 
dextrin for. 484 
Dianthus and. 90 
Gladiolus and. 106 
Hedera and. 114.
Hemerocallis and. L16 
houseplants and. L2Q 
Hydrangea and. 122 
Ilex and. 123 
Ligustrum and. 14J 
Magnolia and. 142 
nicotine for. 428 
Pachysandra and. 152 
pear and, 121 
Pelargonium and. 122 
Phlox and. 180 
predatory mites vs.. 433.452 
Pyracantha and. 133 
pyrethrin for. 480 
Quercus and. 195 
Rosa and, 206
strawberry and. 213 
Tagetes and. 224 
Taxus and, 224 
Thuja and. 225 
Thunbergia and. 226 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 236 
two-spotted. 308 
Verbena and, 248 
Viola and, 250 
water sprays for. 433 
Zinnia and. 253 
Spiders
as aphid predators. 122 
as beneficials, 458-59 
organically acceptablc sprays and 
dusts and. 462 
Spinach, 21 1=12
compost or manure for, 418 
crop rotation and. 418 
culture, 2JL1 
problems of. 2 1 1 -1 2  
pruning and. 432 
Spinacia oleracea. See Spinach 
Spindle tree. See Euonymus 
Spined soldier bugs, 324,324 
bean and. 36 
as beneficials. 450.
buy ing and releasing. 456. 
brown stink bugs distinguished 
from. 26ft 
Spiraea. 212
Spirea, false. See Astilbe 
Spittlebugs. 325,325 
meadow. 325 
strawberry and. 218, 213
Spot
bacterial (see Bacterial spot) 
black (see Black spot) 
blackberry and. 44 
carrot and. 61=62 
celery and. 64 
citrus and, 22 
lawns and. 133.135-36 
leaf (see Leaf spot)
Spot gall, tuliptree and. 144 
Spotted asparagus beetles. 221 
Spotted com rootworms. 285.285 
Spotted cucumber beetles. See Cucum­
bcr beetles, spotted 
Sprays. See also specific types 
homemade. 462.425
Spruce. See Picea
blue (see Picea pungens)
Spruce budworms. 325-26.325 
Abies and. 12 
BTK for. 459 
Picea and, 181.184 
Pinus and. li$3 
Tsuga and. 241 
Spruce gall adelgids. 181. L82 
Spruce needleminers. 1&2 
Spruce spider mites 
Abies and, 12 
Picea and. 161-82. L81 
Pinus and. 184 
Tsuga and. 241 
Spur blight, raspberry and. 138 
Spurge. See Euphorbia: Pachysandra 
cushion (see Euphorbia 
epithymoides)
Griffith's (see Euphorbia 
griffithii)
Squash. 212= L6
compost or manure for. 418 
crop rotation and. 418 
culture, 213. 215 
fruit problems of, 214,216 
leaf and vine problems of. 214, 
215=16 
mosaic virus symptoms on,
321 
radish and. 413 
summer, 212 
winter. 213.36?
Squash bugs. 326.326 
cucumber and. 84 
garlic oil for. 423 
handpicking. 430 
melon and. 143 
repellent crops for. 413 
squash and. 214,215 
tillage and. 428 
Squash vine borers. 327.
322
cucumber and, 85 
melon and. 150 
nematodes and. 458 
squash and. 214.216 
Squirrels
almond and. 12 
avocado and. 31 
Crocus and.S3

530 ■ 
INDEX
Stalk borers
Cosmos and, 142.
Dahlia and. 82 
Delphinium and. 89 
Zinnia and. 233 
Staphylinidae. Stxi Hove beetles 
Starch spray. .484=85 
Steelblue flea beetles. 290 
Steinernema I= Neoplectana/ 
carpocapsae. 437 
Stem nematodes
Hyacinthus and. L2J 
Narcissus and. L53 
Phlox and, ISO 
Stem rot
Begonia and. 40-41 
Campanula and. 58-59 
Dicentra and. 91 
herbs and. LL2 
Paeonia and, 139 
Pelargonium and. 172-71 
sweet potato and. 220 
Tagetes and. 224 
vegetables and. 246 
Stems and roots, disease symptoms on 
roots die back. 400-401 
nx>is with swollen growths. 399-400 
stems discolored. .192-93 
stems entangled with orange 
strings. ,196-9? 
stems with clusters of evergreen 
leaves, 322 
stems with cracks or holes. i9.Lr.92 
stems with swollen growths. .198-99 
stem tips die back . 194-% 
stem tips stunted, 394 
tubers discolored or rotted.
401=2
Sterilization
of male insects. 415 
of seeds. 422-2.1 
Sticky boards. 434.4,18-39 
Stictocephala bisonia. Sec Buffalo 
treehoppers 
Stink bugs. 327-28.327 
bean and. 32
brown, spined soldier bugs distin­
guished from. 26Q 
okra and. L54 
pyrethrin for. 480 
tomato and. 232
Stonecrop. See Sedum
showy (see Sedum spectabile) 
Strawberry. 216=20
Botrytis fruit rot symptoms on.
m
culture. 212
dav-neutral, 211)
everbearing. 216
flower and fruit problems of. 212
frost damage on. 390
June-bearing. 216. 212
leaf paiblems of. 2JLL 218,219
potato and. L&8
purchase of. 423
red stele symptoms on. 400
sulfur and. 485
Verticillium wilt symptoms on.
MUM 
viral susceptibility of, 352 
whole plant problems of. 218.
219-20. .160 
Strawberry crown borers. 219-20 
Strawberry crown moths. 219-20 
Strawberry leafrollers. 218.219 
Strawberry root weevils. 328.328 
Heuchera and. L12=18 
nematodes and. 452 
strawberry and. 220 
Strawflower. See Helichrysum 
Streptomyces, 466 
Strepiomyces avermitilis. 424 
Striped blister beetles, 274.429 
Striped cucumber beetles. See Cucum­
ber beetles, striped 
Striped flea beetles. See Rea beetles, 
striped
Striped stalk borers. Delphinium and.
89
Sulfur
as fungicide. 348.369.407.472.
485
as pesticide. 485 
Sulfur dioxide injury. 379-80 
blackberry and. 329 
Sulfur dioxide pollution. 356 
Summer disease, apple and. 24 
Sunflower. See Helianthus 
Sunscald. 388
tomato and. 232.388 
Superior oil sprays. 347.478-79 
Susceptible plants. 414
Sweet alyssum. See Lobularia 
Sweet gum. See Liquidambar 
Sweet pea. See Lathyrus 
Sweet potato, 220-22 
cold storage of. 362 
culture. 220
leaf and whole plant problems of,
220-21 
root problems of, 221-22 
Sweet potato weevils. 221.222 
Sweet potato whiteflies. 335 
Sweet William. See Dianthus barbatus 
Swiss chard. 66 
Sycamore. See Platanus 
Sycamore lace bugs. L86 
Symptoms
of disease. 370-403 
signs vs., 320 
of insect damage. 264-67 
primary vs. secondary. 359 
Svnanthedon. See Fruit borers 
Synanthedon exitiosa. See Peachtree 
borers
Synanthedon pictipes. See Peachtree 
borers
Syringa. 222-23 
Svrphidae. See Hover flies 
Syrphid flies, food for. 450
T
Tachinid flies. 328-29.328 
as beneficials.
houseflies distinguished from. 261 
Tagetes. 223-24
nematodes and. 354 
as pesticide. 424 
problems of. 224 
Tanacetum (—Chrysanthemum) 
cinerariifolium. 480 
Tansy
as pesticide. 424 
as repellent crop. 419 
Tarnished plant bugs. 329.329 
annuals and. L9 
bean and. 35 
carrot and. 60 
Hydrangea and. 121-22 
lettuce and. L38 
pea and. 162

INDEX ■ 
531
peach and, 166 
perennials and. 128 
sticky board traps for. 439 
strawberry and. 2TL 2JL8 
tillage and, 428 
Tar paper, 445
Tarragon. See Artemisia dracunculus 
Taxus. 22=L25
cold injury damage on, 396. 
problems of. 224-25 
waterlogged soil damage on.
385
Temperature, for disease control.
362
Tent caterpillars. 330.330 
Baltimore orioles and. 1 
Eastern, 330 
Fagus and. %  
pruning and. 431.432 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 236 
Tetranychidae. See Spider mites 
Texas root rot, herbs and. 1 12 
Thalictrum. 225 
Thalictrum aquilegifolium. 225 
Thermometer, 360 
Thinning cut. 103 
Thrips, 331,331
alcohol sprays for, 465 
Allium and. 16l 
ammonia sprays for. 466 
Arabis and, 28 
asparagus and. 30 
Begonia and, H  
cabbage and, 55 
Campanula and. 58 
citrus and.4b2.4S3 
dextrin for. 484
diatomaceous earth for, 421.422
flower (see Rower thrips)
Gladiolus and. L05
Hemerocallis and. 11.3-16
Iris and, 126
lettuce and. 13&
mulches for, 444
Narcissus and, 152
neem for. 477
onion and. L56
Paeonia and, 159
predatory miles and. 453
pyrethrin for, 480
Rosa an d ,206
soap sprays for, 4143 
traps for, 434.438-39 
water sprays for. 433 
Thuja. 225-26 
Thunbergia. 226 
Thyme. 226
beneficials attracted by. 450 
as pesticide. 424 
problems of. 22i±
Thymus vulgaris. See Thyme 
Thyridopteryx ephemeraeformis. See 
Bagworms 
Ticks, soap sprays for. 483 
Tickseed. See Coreopsis grandiflora 
Tiger beetles. 332 
as beneficials. 4511 
six-spotted. 332 
Tilia. 221 
Tillage. 427-28
for disease control, 365 
Timed planting, for pest resistance.
4.11, 421-22 
Tingidae. See Lace bugs 
Tip blight. Anus and. 183, L84 
Toads, as beneficials, 8,453 
Tobacco, flowering. See Nicotiana 
Tobacco budworms, viral pathogens 
for. 461 
Tobacco homworms, 332 
pepper and. 125 
tomato and, 211 
Tobacco mosaic vims 
eggplant and, 23 
pepper an d ,124 
sanitation and. 422 
spread of. 352
by humans, 362 
tomato and, 229.230.232.
353
Tolerant plants, 414 
Tomato. 227-33
anthracnose symptoms on.
386
blossom end rot symptoms on.
382
compost or manure for. 418 
culture, 22S
curly top symptoms on. 383 
disease dctcction for. 352 
disease susceptibility of, 5 ,343,
early blight symptoms on. 324 
flower and fruit problems of. 229, 
231-33 
fungicides and. 369 
Fusarium wilt symptoms on, 384 
leaf and whole plant problems of,
oil sprays and. 419 
pepper and, 123
potassium deficiency damage on,
379
potato and. 188 
as repellent crop. 419 
resistant cultivars. 228,363 
root knot nematode symptoms 
o n .400 
seed sterilization for. 423 
Septoria leaf spot symptoms on. 
326
site selection and. 3 
strawberry and. 219 
sulfur and, 485 
sunscald damage on. 388 
limed planting and, 422 
trap crops and. 440 
Verticillium wilt symntomson. 
380.384
Tomato fruitworms, 229,233.284.
284
Tomato galls, grapevine. Ill
Tomato hornworms. 229,332.332 
basil and. 2 
boiling. 431 
BTK for. 459 
dill and lovage and. 440 
pepper and. 125 
tillage and, 428 
tomato and, 231.233
Tomato-leaf spray, 485
Tomato pinworms 
pyrethrin for, 48Q 
tomato and, 233
Tomato russet mites. 302
Tools, sanitation of. 365.422.432.
m
Topping, 234
Tortoise beetles, sweet potato and.
221
Transplants, disease-free medium for.
413
Trap crops. 439.-4Q

532 
■ 
INDEX
Traps. 429-30, 434-40 
for animals, 408. 409 
for apple maggots. 
bait. 434-33
for cherry fruit flies, 435 
for chinch hugs. 433-36 
for earwigs. 436 
for Japanese beetles. 436 
light. 432
pheromone. 437-38 
for slugs and snails, 438 
sticky boards. 434.438-39 
trap crops. 432z40 
water. HO 
Tree bands. 446?.46 
Treehoppers. buffalo. 276.226 
Trees, shrubs, and vines. 233-40 
choosing control for. 234-33 
fruit trees Isee Fruit trees* 
garden task timing for. 362 
leaf problems of. 233-38 
proper planting of. 239 
pruning cuts. 235 
searching out stress of, 233:34 
selection of. 234 
topping. 234
treating tree wounds. 235 
trunk and branch problems of.
238
whole plant problems of. 238=40 
Tree wounds, 234.235 
Trichoderma. 462 
Trichogramma mtnuium
buying and releasing. 456 
pecan and. UJ 
Trichogramma wasps 
apple and, 22 
avocado and. 32 
buying and releasing, 45£l 
Canna and. 39
for codling moth control. 262.263 
Trichoplusia ni. See Cabbage loopers 
Tropaeolum, 24()
ozone damage on. 328 
as pesticide. 424 
problems of. 240 
soap sprays and. 483 
as trap crop. 440 
True bugs
Alcea and. 16 
metamorphosis of. 252 
perennials and. L28
True mistletoes. 354 
Trunk bands. 443-46 
Tsuga. 240-41
Tubers, discolored or rotted. 401:2 
Tubcrworms. potato. See Potato 
tuberworms 
Tulipa. 241-42 
lilies and. 142 
problems of. 242 
viruses and, 351 
Tulip bulb aphids. iL  242 
Tulip fire. 242
Tulip tree. See Liriodendron 
Tuliptree spot gall. 144 
Turnip. 142=43
root problems of. 243 
seed sterilization for. 423 
Tussock moths. 333 
Aesculus and, 14 
manual control of. 430 
Western. 331 
Twicestabbed lady beetles. 301 
Twig blight. 395=%
Cornusand.81 
Juniperus and. 129.395 
Rhododendron and, 366 
Two-spotted spider mites, 3ft8 
Typhlodromus occidentalis. See 
Metaseiulus occidentalis
u
Ulmus. 243-43
problems of. 244-43.244 
Ulmus americana. 243 
Ulmus panifolia. 243 
Ultraviolet light traps, 432 
USDA plant hardiness zone map. 486
V
Vaccinium. See Blueberry 
Vaccinium angustifolium. See Blue­
berry, lowbush 
Vaccinium ashei. See Blueberry.
rabbiteye 
Vaccinium corymbosum. See Blue­
berry. highbush
Vacuuming. 433
Valsa canker. See Cytospora canker 
Variegated cutworm. 286 
Vectors,
Vegetables, 243-4?
Velvctbcan caterpillars, viral patho­
gens for, 461 
Veratrum. 422 
Verbena. 247-48 
Verbena, shrub. See Lantana 
Veronica. 248 
Veronica incana. 248 
Verticillium. 344
Verticillium wilt, T, 363-66.380.18Q 
Acer and. L U S 6 
avocado and. 32 
blackberry and. 44 
eggplant and. 
430 
herbs a n d .116 
leaf symptoms. 380.384-83 
pepper and. 124 
potato and. 189. ia0 
raspberry and. 197.197. I9i9 
rhubarb and.203 
stem sympioms. 396 
strawberry and. 219.380.384 
tomato and. 230.380.384 
vegetables and. 246 
Vervain. See Verbena 
Vespula. See Yellow jackets 
Vetch, pea and. 163 
Viburnum. 248=49 
Vidalia beetles, citrus and. 23 
Vinca. 249 
Vinca major. 249 
Vinca minor. 249 
Vinegar flics, 333.311 
Vines. See Trees, shrubs, and vines 
Vine weevils, black. See Black vine 
weevils 
Viola. 249-50
Viral decline. Narcissus and. 132-33 
Virginia creeper. See Parthenocissus 
Viruses. 3.31-33. See also specific 
types 
beneficial. 461=62 
carriers of. 362 
control of, 353 
Dahlia and. 88 
destruction of. 365 
Dianthus and. 90 
heat treatment for. 362

INDEX ■ 
533
Lilium and. 142
nature of. 151
nomenclature, 342
as pathogens. 144
Petunia and. 129
prevention of disease from. 352-53
resistant cultivars. 351
/?osa and. 206
spread of. 352
symptoms of. 3^1-5?.
Tulipa and. 242 
Vitis. See Crape
Vitis labrusca. See Grape. American 
Vitis rotundifolia. See Grape.
muscadine 
Vitis vini/era. See Grape. European 
(wine)
Voles, Crocus and. 83
w
Walnut. 250-51 
black. 250 
English. 250.251 
problems of. 250-51 
Walnut blight, 250-51 
Walnut husk flics, 282 
Walnut husk fly maggots. 250 
Walnut wilt, tomato and, 23Q 
Wasps
as aphid predators. 62 
Braconid (see Braconid wasps) 
citrus oils for. 421 
gall, 253,231
Ichneumon (sec* Ichneumon wasps) 
parasitic, 440 
food for. 442 
Trichogramma (see Trichogramma 
wasps)
Water
for beneficial insects. 450 
excessive. 155 
in soil. 5,156 
Watering of plants. 162 
irregular, 155 
Waterlogged soil. 385 
Taxus and, 185 
Watermelon. 251 
Water sprays, 433-34 
Water traps, 440
Weather, disease and. 360 
Webworms
Albizia and. L5 
Berberis and. 4 1 
Cotoneaster and. 82 
fall. 314.1M
garden. See Garden webworms 
Gleditsia and. 102 
Juniperus and. 128, 122 
Py racantha and. 192 
sod (see Sod webworms) 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 236 
Weevils
bean and. 22X221
black vine (see Black vine weevils)
boll. BTSD for. 460
bulbs and, 50
carrot and (see Carrot weevils) 
Cedrus and. 63 
chestnut and, 20 
handpicking. 43Q 
Japanese (see Japanese weevils) 
parsley and. 160 
pea a n d .164.428 
pecan and. I ll 
pepper and.L25 
Picea and. L82 
Anus and. 183-84 
Salix and. 202 
shaking and. 433 
strawberry root (see Strawberry 
root weevils) 
sweet potato and. 221,222 
Weigela. 251
Western filbert blight, 28 
Western flower thrips, 331 
Western predatory mites, buying and 
releasing, 455 
Western rootworm beetles, com and. 
22
Western tussock moths. 333 
Wet plants. 3, 421 
Wetwood, bacterial. 393.393 
Wheat, sprouted, as trap crop. 440 
Whiteflies. 335,335 
Ageratum and, L5 
alcohol sprays for. 465 
ammonia sprays for. 466 
annuals and. 18 
Begonia and. 40 
bulbs and. 51 
dextrin for. 484
fungal pathogens for. 4fcl 
garlic oil for. 421 
grape and. L10 
growth regulators for. 42}
Ilex and. 121 
Lantana and. Lll 
neem for. 422 
Nicotiana ami. L53 
Pelargonium and. 122 
perennials and, 1ZZ 
pyrethrin for. 480 
Rhododendron and. 202 
soap sprays for. 481 
sweet potato and. 315 
traps for. 434.438.412 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 232 
Whitefly parasites, buy ing and releas­
ing.
White grubs 
corn and,22 
lawns and. 133.135 
potato and. L82 
sweet potato and. 222 
Whitcmarkcd tussock moths. Aesculus 
a n d .14 
White mold, bean and. 35,12 
White pine blister rust 
currant and. 86 
Pinus and. 183. IM  
White pine weevils 
A rea and. 182 
Pinus and. 183=84 
White rot
apple and. 24 
onion and. 152 
White rust, spinach and. 212 
Wild systems. 1 
Willow. See Salix 
Willow flea weevils. 209 
Willow lace bugs. 202 
Wilt. 345. 346. 350
bacterial (see Bacterial wilt) 
Berberis and. 41 
Clematis and, 24 
Dicentra and, 21 
fungal (see Fungal wilt)
Fusarium (see Fusarium wilt) 
Quercus and (see Oak wilt)
Sy ringa and. 221 
Tilia and. 222
Verticillium (see Verticillium wilt) 
walnut, tomato and. 230

534 ■ 
INDEX
Wilt-Pruf. 342 
Windflower. See Anemone
Grecian (see Anemone blanda) 
poppy (see Anemone coronariaI 
Windthrow. of trees, shrubs, and vines.
2M
Winter injury. See Cold injury 
Wirestem. cabbage and. 34 
Wireworms. 336.336 
bait traps for, 433 
bean and. 33 
carrot and, til 
corn and. 22 
Gladiolus and. LQb 
lettuce and. L3& 
nematodes and. 432 
onion and. 136 
potato and. 18K. 189, liU 
sod crops and.UUB 
sweet potato and. 221.222 
Wisteria. 231-32
Witches' broom. Syringa and. 223 
Witch hazel. See Hamamelis
Witch hazel cone gall. 113 
Woodbine. See Parthenocissus 
Wood rot
Platanus and, 186 
on trees, shrubs, and vines. 238 
Woody plants, pruning for pest control. 
432
Woolly adelgids. Tsuga and. 241 
Woolly apple aphids. 262 
Woolly bears. 336-37.33d 
Wormwood. See Artemisia
X
Xenorhabdus. 432
Y
Yam. See Sweet potato 
Yarrow. See Achillea 
Yellow jackets, 337.332
Yellows, 3H1.381
Aster and (see Aster yellows* 
Fusarium (see Fusarium yellows) 
Ulmus and. 381 
Yew. See Taxus 
Yucca. 252
Yucca filamentosa, 232 
Yucca plant bugs. 232
z
Zea mays var. rugosa. See Corn 
Zinc deficiency 
bean and. 36-37 
tomato and. 230 
Zinnia. 233
bacterial spot symptoms on,
322 
mildew and. 12 
powdery mildew and. 12,381 
problems of. 233 
Zucchini. 213

